1. We ought to take into account not only the fact that day by day life is
being spent and a smaller balance remaining, but this further point also that,
should we live longer, it is at least doubtful whether the intellect will
hereafter be the same, still sufficient to comprehend events and the
speculation which contributes to the understanding alike of things divine
and human. For, if the mind begin to decay, there will be no failure of
functions like transpiration, nutrition, sense-impression, and desire; but the
right employment of ourselves, precision in regard to the related elements
of duty, analysis of the indications of sense, to know just whether the time
is come to take leave of life, and all questions of the kind which specially
require a trained judgement— these are extinguished before the rest.
Accordingly we must press forward, not only because every day we are
drawing nearer to death, but also because the apprehension of events and
the ability to adapt ourselves to them begin to wane before the end.
2. We must also observe closely points of this kind, that even the
secondary effects of Nature’s processes possess a sort of grace and
attraction. To take one instance, bread when it is being baked breaks open at
some places; now even these cracks, which in one way contradict the
promise of the baker’s art, somehow catch the eye and stimulate in a special
way our appetite for the food. And again figs, when fully mature, gape, and
in ripe olives their very approach to decay adds a certain beauty of its own
to the fruit. Ears of corn too when they bend downwards, the lion’s
wrinkled brow, the foam flowing from the boar’s mouth, and many other
characteristics that are far from beautiful if we look at them in isolation, do
nevertheless because they follow from Nature’s processes lend those a
further ornament and a fascination. And so, if a man has a feeling for, and a
deeper insight into the processes of the Universe, there is hardly one but
will somehow appear to present itself pleasantly to him, even among mere
attendant circumstances. Such a man also will feel no less pleasure in
looking at the actual jaws of wild beasts than at the imitations which
painters and sculptors exhibit, and he will be enabled to see in an old
woman or an old man a kind of freshness and bloom, and to look upon the
charms of his own boy slaves with sober eyes. And many such experiences
there will be, not convincing to everyone but occurring to him and to him
alone who has become genuinely familiar with Nature and her works.
3. Hippocrates, after curing many sicknesses, himself fell sick and died.
The Chaldean astrologers foretold the death of many persons, then the
hour of fate overtook them also. Alexander, Pompeius, and Julius Caesar,
after so often utterly destroying whole towns and slaying in the field many
myriads of horse and foot, themselves also one day departed from life.
Heraclitus, after many speculations about the fire which should consume
the Universe, was waterlogged by dropsy, poulticed himself with cow-dung,
and died. Vermin killed Democritus; another kind of vermin Socrates.
What is the moral? You went on board, you set sail, you have made the
port. Step ashore: if to a second life, nothing is void of gods, not even in
that other world; but if to unconsciousness, you will cease to suffer pains
and pleasures and to be the servant of an earthly vessel as far inferior as that
which does it service is superior; for the one is mind and deity, the other
clay and gore.
4. Do not waste the balance of life left to you in thoughts about other
persons, when you are not referring to some advantage of your fellows—for
why do you rob yourself of something else which you might do—I mean if
you imagine to yourself what so and so is doing, and why; what he is saying
or thinking or planning, and every thought of the kind which leads you
astray from close watch over your governing self?
Rather you must, in the train of your thoughts, avoid what is merely casual
and without purpose, and above all curiosity and malice; you must habituate
yourself only to thoughts about which if someone were suddenly to ask:
‘What is in your mind now?’, you would at once reply, quite frankly, this or
that; and so from the answer it would immediately be plain that all was
simplicity and kindness, the thoughts of a social being, who disregards
pleasurable, or to speak more generally luxurious imaginings or rivalry of
any kind, or envy and suspicion or anything else about which you would
blush to put into words that you had it in your head.
A man so minded, putting off no longer to be one of the elect, is surely a
priest and minister of gods, employing aright that which is seated within
him, which makes the mere mortal to be unstained by pleasures, unscathed
by any pain, untouched by any wrong, unconscious of any wickedness; a
wrestler in the greatest contest of all, not to be overthrown by any passion;
dyed with justice to the core, welcoming with his whole heart all that comes
to pass and is assigned to him; seldom and only under some great necessity
and for the common good imagining what another person is saying or doing
or thinking. For he has only his own work to realize and he keeps in mind
continually what is assigned to him from the Whole; his work he makes
perfect, his lot he is convinced is good; for the birth-spirit assigned to every
man goes with him and carries him along with it.
Moreover, he remembers that all reasonable beings are akin to himself, and
that although to care for all men is in accord with man’s nature, he is to
cling not to the opinion of all men, but only of men who live in accord with
Nature. Indeed, he remembers continually what those who do not so live are
like, in their homes and abroad, by night and by day; what manner of men
they are, and those with whom they defile themselves. Therefore he takes
no account even of the praise of such men-men who are not even acceptable
to themselves.
5. Do not act unwillingly nor selfishly nor without self-examination, nor
with divergent motives. Let no affectation veneer your thinking. Be neither
a busy talker, nor a busybody. Moreover let the God within be the guardian
of a real man, a man of ripe years, a statesman, a Roman, a magistrate,
who has taken his post like one waiting for the Retreat to sound, ready to
depart, needing no oath nor any man as witness. And see that you have
gladness of face, no need of service from without nor the peace that other
men bestow. You should stand upright,
 not be held upright.
6. If you discover in the life of man something higher than justice, truth,
temperance, fortitude, and generally speaking than your understanding
contented with itself, where it presents you behaving by the rule of right,
and satisfied with destiny, in what is assigned to you and is not yours to
choose; if, I say, you see something higher than this, turn to it with all your
heart and enjoy the supreme good now that it is found. But if nothing higher
is revealed than the very divinity seated within you, subordinating your
private impulses to itself, examining your thoughts, having withdrawn
itself, as Socrates used to say,
 from the sense-affections, and subordinated
itself to the gods and making men its first care; if you find all else to be
smaller and cheaper than this, give no room to anything else, to which when
once you incline and turn, you will no longer have the power without a
struggle to prefer in honour that which is your own, your peculiar good. For
it is not right to set up a rival of another kind to the good of Reason and of
the Commonwealth; the praise of the multitude, for example, or place or
wealth or pleasurable indulgence. All these, though they appear for a little
while to be in accord, suddenly gain the mastery and carry a man away. Do
you then, I say, simply and of your own free will, choose the higher and
hold fast to that. ‘But the higher is what is to our advantage’;
if to the
advantage of a reasonable being, keep hold of that, but if to the advantage
of a mere animate creature, say so and preserve your decision without
parade; only see to it that you make a choice that will not betray you.
7. Never value as an advantage to yourself what will force you one day to
break your word, to abandon self-respect, to hate, suspect, execrate another,
to act a part, to covet anything that calls for walls or coverings to conceal it.
A man who puts first his own mind and divinity, and the holy rites of its
excellence, makes no scene, utters no groans, will need neither the refuge of
solitude nor the crowded streets. What is most worthwhile, he will pass his
days neither in pursuit nor in avoidance, and it is no concern at all of his
whether the time be longer or shorter for which he shall have the use of the
soul in its bodily envelope; for even if he must be released at once, he will
depart as easily as he would perform any other act that can be done with
reverence and sobriety, being careful all his life of this one thing alone that
his understanding be not found in any state which is foreign to a reasonable
social being.
8. In the understanding of a man of chastened and purified spirit you will
find no trace of festering wound, no ulceration, no abscess beneath the skin.
The hour of fate does not surprise his life before its fulfilment, so that one
would say that the actor is leaving the stage before he has fulfilled his role,
before the play is over. You will find nothing servile or artificial, no
dependence on others nor severance from them; nothing to account for,
nothing that needs a hole to hide in.
9. Reverence your faculty of judgement. On this it entirely rests that your
governing self no longer has a judgement disobedient to Nature and to the
estate of a reasonable being. This judgement promises deliberateness,
familiar friendship with men, and to follow in the train of the gods.
10. Therefore throw all else aside, and hold fast only these few things;
further calling to mind at the same time that each of us lives only in the
present, this brief moment; the rest is either a life that is past, or is in an
uncertain future. Little the life each lives, little the corner of the earth he
lives in, little even the longest fame hereafter, and even that dependent on
a succession of poor mortals, who will very soon be dead, and have not
learnt to know themselves, much less the man who was dead long years
ago.
11. To the above supports let one more be added. Always make a figure or
outline of the imagined object as it occurs, in order to see distinctly what it
is in its essence, naked, as a whole and parts; and say to yourself its
individual name and the names of the things of which it was compounded
and into which it will be broken up. For nothing is so able to create
greatness of mind as the power methodically and truthfully to test each
thing that meets one in life, and always to look upon it so as to attend at the
same time to the use which this particular thing contributes to a Universe of
a certain definite kind, what value it has in reference to the Whole, and
what to man, who is a citizen of the highest City, whereof all other cities are
like households. What is this which now creates an image in me, what is its
composition? how long will it naturally continue, what virtue is of use to
meet it; for example, gentleness, fortitude, truth, good faith, simplicity, selfreliance, and the rest? Therefore, in each case, we must say: this has come
from God; this by the actual co-ordination of events, the complicated web
and similar coincidence or chance; this again from my fellow man, my
kinsman, my comrade, yet one who does not know what is natural for
himself But I do know; wherefore I use him kindly and justly, according to
the natural law of fellowship, aiming, however, at the same time at his
desert, where the question is morally indifferent.
12. If you complete the present work, following the rule of right, earnestly,
with all your might, with kindness, and admit no side issue, but preserve
your own divinity pure and erect, as if you have this moment to restore it; if
you make this secure, expecting nothing and avoiding nothing, but content
with present action in accord with Nature and with heroic truth in what you
mean and say, you will live the blessed life. Now there is no one who is
able to prevent this.
13. As doctors have their instruments and scalpels always at hand to meet
sudden demands for treatment, so do you have your doctrines ready in order
to recognize the divine and human, and so to do everything, even the very
smallest, as mindful of the bond which unites the divine and human; for you
will not do any act well which concerns man without referring it to the
divine; and the same is true of your conduct to God.
14. Do not wander from your path any longer, for you are not likely to read
your notebooks or your deeds of ancient Rome and Greece or your extracts
from their writings, which you laid up against old age. Hasten then to the
goal, lay idle hopes aside, and come to your own help, if you care at all for
yourself, while still you may.
15. They have not learnt to know the manifold significance of theft, of
sowing, of buying, resting, seeing what ought to be done. This depends not
on the bodily eye but on another kind of vision.
16. Body, vital spirit, mind: of the body, sense perceptions; of the vital
spirit, impulses; of the mind, doctrines. To be impressed by images belongs
also to the beasts of the field, to be swayed by the strings of impulse to wild
beasts, to men who sin against nature, to a Phalaris or a Nero. To have
the mind as guide to what appear to be duties belongs also to men who do
not believe in gods, who betray their own country, who do anything and
everything once they have locked their doors. If then all else is common
to you with those whom I have mentioned, it remains the peculiar mark of
the good man to love and welcome what befalls him and is the thread fate
spins for him; not to soil the divinity seated within his breast nor to disquiet
it with a mob of imaginations, but to preserve and to propitiate it, following
God in orderly wise, uttering no word contrary to truth, doing no act
contrary to justice. And if all men disbelieve that he lives simply, modestly,
and cheerfully, he is not angry with any one of them nor diverted from the
road that leads to the goal of his life, at which he must arrive, pure,
peaceful, ready to depart, in effortless accord with his own birth-spirit.