1. At dawn of day, when you dislike being called, have this thought ready:
‘I am called to man’s labour; why then do I make a difficulty if I am going
out to do what I was born to do and what I was brought into the world for?
Is it for this that I am fashioned, to lie in bedclothes and keep myself
warm?’ ‘But this is more pleasant.’ ‘Were you born then to please yourself;
in fact for feeling, not for action? Can’t you see the plants, the birds, the
ants,
the spiders, the bees each doing his own work, helping for their part
to adjust a world? And then you refuse to do a man’s office and don’t make
haste to do what is according to your own nature.’ ‘But a man needs rest as
well.’ I agree, he does, yet Nature assigns limits to rest, as well as to eating
and drinking, and you nevertheless go beyond her limits, beyond what is
sufficient; in your actions only this is no longer so, there you keep inside
what is in your power. The explanation is that you do not love your own
self, else surely you would love both your nature and her purpose. But other
men who love their own crafts wear themselves out in labours upon them,
unwashed and unfed; while you hold your own nature in less honour than
the smith his metal work, the dancer his art, the miser his coin, the lover of
vainglory his fame. Yet they, when the passion is on them, refuse either to
eat or to sleep sooner than refuse to advance the objects they care about,
whereas you imagine acts of fellowship to bring a smaller return and to be
deserving of less pains.
2. How simple to reject and to wipe away every disturbing or alien
imagination, and straightway to be in perfect calm.
3. Make up your mind that you deserve every word and work that is
according to Nature, and do not allow the ensuing blame or speech of any
men to talk you over; but, if it is right to be done or said, do not count
yourself undeserving of it. Those others have their own selves to govern
them, and use their several inclinations. Don’t look round at that, but walk
the straight way, following your own and the common Nature, for the path
of them both is one.
4. I walk in Nature’s way until I shall lie down and rest, breathing my last in
this from which I draw my daily breath, and lying down on this from which
my father drew his vital seed, my mother her blood, my nurse her milk;
from which for so many years I am fed and watered day by day; which
bears my footstep and my misusing it for so many purposes.
5. ‘Your mental powers they cannot admire.’ Granted! but there is much
else of which you cannot say: ‘that is no gift of mine’. Bring forth then
what is wholly in your power, freedom from guile, dignity, endurance of
labour, distaste for pleasure, contentment with your portion, need of little,
kindness, freedom, plain-living, reserve in speech, magnanimity. See you
not how much you are able to bring forth, where there is no excuse of want
of gift or want of facility, and yet you are content to keep a lower place?
Are you obliged to grumble, to be grasping, to flatter, to blame your poor
body, to be obsequious, to vaunt yourself, to be tossed about in mind,
because you have been fashioned without talent? No, by heaven, you had
the power to be rid of all this long ago, and only, if at all, to be convicted of
some slowness and tardiness of understanding; and even there you should
exercise yourself, not disregarding your faults nor finding satisfaction in
your dullness.
6. One kind of man, when he does a good turn to someone, is forward also
to set down the favour to his account. Another is not forward to do this, but
still within himself he thinks as though he were a creditor and is conscious
of what he has done. A third is in a sense not even conscious of what he has
done, but he is like a vine which has borne grapes, and asks nothing more
when once it has borne its appropriate fruit. A horse runs, a hound tracks,
bees make honey, and a man does good, but doesn’t know that he has done
it and passes on to a second act, like a vine to bear once more its grapes in
due season. You ought then to be one of these who in a way are not aware
of what they do. ‘Yes, but one ought to be aware precisely of this; for’, he
argues, ‘it is a mark of the social being to perceive it too.’ What you are
saying is true, but you take what is now meant in the wrong way; because
of this you will be one of those whom I mentioned above, for they, too, are
led astray by a kind of plausible reasoning. But if you make up your mind
to understand what is meant, do not be afraid of omitting thereby any social
act.’
7. A prayer of the people of Athens:
‘Rain, beloved Zeus, rain on the
cornfields and the plains of Attica.’ One ought to pray thus simply and
freely, or not to pray at all.
8. We commonly say: ‘Aesculapius ordered a man horse-exercise, cold
baths, or no shoes’; similarly we might say: ‘Universal Nature ordered him
sickness, disablement, loss or some other affliction.’ In the former phrase
‘ordered’ virtually means ‘laid this down for him as appropriate to health’;
in the latter what befits every man has been laid down for him as
appropriate to the natural order. So, too, we say things ‘befit us’ as
workmen talk of squared blocks ‘fitting’ in walls or pyramids bonding with
one another in a definite structure. For in the whole of things there is one
connecting harmony, and as out of all material bodies the world is made
perfect into a connected body, so out of all causes the order of Nature is
made perfect into one connected cause. Even quite simple folk have in their
minds what I am saying, for they use the phrase; ‘it was sent to him’; and so
this was ‘sent’ to him, that is, ‘this was ordered for him’. Accordingly let us
accept these orders as we accept what Aesculapius orders. Many of them,
too, are assuredly severe, yet we welcome them in hopes of health. Let the
performance and completion of the pleasure of the Universal Nature seem
to you to be your pleasure, precisely as the conduct of your health is seen to
be, and so welcome all that comes to pass, even though it appear rather
cruel, because it leads to that end, to the health of the universe, that is to the
welfare and well-being of Zeus. For he would not ‘send’ this to one, if it
were not to the well-being of the whole, no more than any living principle
you may choose ‘sends’ anything which is not appropriate to what is
governed by it. Thus there are two reasons why you must be content with
what happens to you: first because it was for you it came to pass, for you it
was ordered and to you it was related, a thread of destiny stretching back to
the most ancient causes; secondly because that which has come to each
individually is a cause of the welfare and the completion and in very truth
of the actual continuance of that which governs the Whole. For the perfect
Whole is mutilated if you sever the least pan of the contact and continuity
alike of its causes as of its members; and you do this so far as in you lies,
whenever you are disaffected, and in a measure you are destroying it.
9. Don’t be disgusted, don’t give up, don’t be impatient if you do not carry
out entirely conduct based in every detail upon right principles; but after a
fall return again, and rejoice if most of your actions are worthier of human
character. Love that to which you go back, and don’t return to Philosophy
as to a schoolmaster, but as a man with sore eyes to the sponge and salve, as
another to a poultice, another to a fomentation. For so you will show that to
obey Reason is no great matter but rather you will find rest in it. Remember,
too, that philosophy wills nothing else than the will of your own nature,
whereas you were willing some other thing not in accord with Nature. For
what is sweeter than this accord? Does not pleasure overcome us just by
sweetness? Well, see whether magnanimity, freedom, simplicity,
consideration for others, holiness are not sweeter; for what is sweeter than
wisdom itself when you bear in mind the unbroken current in all things of
the faculty of understanding and knowledge?
10. Realities are so veiled, one might say, from our eyes that not a few and
those not insignificant thinkers
thought them to be incomprehensible,
while even the Stoics think them difficult of comprehension; and all our
assent to perceptions is liable to alter. For where is the infallible man to be
met? Pass on, then, to objects of experience—how short their duration, how
cheap, and able to be in the possession of the bestial,
the harlot, or the
brigand. Next pass to the characters of those who live with you, even the
best of whom it is hard to suffer, not to say that it is hard for a man even to
endure himself. In such a fog and filth,
in so great a torrent of being and
time and movement and moving things, what can be respected or be
altogether the object of earnest pursuit I do not see. On the contrary, one
must console oneself by awaiting Nature’s release, and not chafing at the
circumstances of delay, but finding repose only in two things: one, that
nothing will befall me which is not in accordance with the nature of the
Whole; the other, that it is in my power to do nothing contrary to my God
and inward Spirit; for there is no one who shall force me to sin against this.
11. ‘To what purpose, then, am I now using my soul?’ In every case ask
yourself this question and examine yourself: ‘What have I now in this part
which men call the governing part, and whose soul have I at present? A
child’s, a boy’s, a woman’s, a despot’s, a dumb animal’s, a dangerous
beast’s?’
12. You could apprehend the character of what the majority of men fancy to
be ‘goods’ like this. If a man were to conceive the existence of real goods,
like wisdom, temperance, justice, fortitude, he could not with those in his
mind still listen to the popular proverb about ‘goods in every corner’, for it
will not fit. But with what appear to the majority of men to be goods in his
mind he will listen to and readily accept what the comic poet said as an
appropriate witticism. In this way even the majority perceive the difference,
otherwise this proverb would not in the one case offend and be disclaimed,
whereas in the case of wealth and the blessings which lead to luxury or
show we accept it as a witticism to fit the case. Go on, then, and ask
whether one should respect and conceive to be good, things to which when
one has thought of them one could properly apply the proverb that their
owner is so well off that he ‘has not a corner where to ease himself.
13. I was composed of a formal and a material substance; and of these
neither will pass away into nothingness, just as neither came to exist out of
nothingness. Thus, every part of me will be assigned its place by change
into some part of the Universe, and that again into another part of the
Universe, and so on to infinity. By a similar change both my parents and I
came to exist, and so on to another infinity of regression. For there is no
reason to prevent one speaking so, even if the Universe is governed
according to finite periods (of coming to be and passing away).
14. Reason and the method of reasoning are abilities, sufficient to
themselves and their own operations. Thus, they start from their appropriate
principle and proceed to their proposed end; wherefore reasonable acts are
called right acts, to indicate the rightness of their path.
15. A man ought to treasure none of these things, which does not fall to a
man’s portion qua man. They are not requirements of a man, nor does
man’s nature profess them, nor are they accomplishments of man’s nature.
Accordingly man’s end does not lie in them, and certainly not the good
which is complementary to his end. Moreover, if any of these were given as
his portion to man, it would not have been his portion to disdain them and
to resist them, nor would the man who made himself independent of them
have been laudable nor the man who took less of them than he might, have
been good, if they were really ‘goods’. But as things are, the more a man
robs himself of these and other such, the more he forbears when he is
robbed of them, so much the more is he good.
16. As are your repeated imaginations so will your mind be, for the soul is
dyed by its imaginations.
 Dye it, then, in a succession of imaginations like
these: for instance, where it is possible to live, there also it is possible to
live well: but it is possible to live in a palace, therefore it is also possible to
live well in a palace. Or once more: a creature is made for that in whose
interest it was created: and that for which it was made, to this it tends: and
to what it tends, in this is its end: and where its end is, there is the
advantage and the good alike of each creature: therefore fellowship is the
good of a reasonable creature. For it has been proved long ago that we are
born for fellowship; or was it not plain that the inferior creatures are in the
interests of the superior, the superior of one another? But the animate are
superior to the inanimate and the reasoning to the merely animate.
17. To pursue the impossible is madness: but it is impossible for evil men
not to do things of this sort.
18. Nothing befalls anything which that thing is not naturally made to bear.
The same experience befalls another, and he is unruffled and remains
unharmed; either because he is unaware that it has happened or because he
exhibits greatness of soul. Is it not strange that ignorance and
complaisance are stronger than wisdom . . .?
19. Things as such do not touch the soul in the least: they have no avenue to
the soul nor can they turn or move it. It alone turns and moves itself, and it
makes what is submitted to it resemble the judgements of which it deems
itself deserving.
20. In one relation man is the nearest creature to ourselves, so far as we
must do them good and suffer them. But so far as they are obstacles to my
peculiar duties, man becomes something indifferent to me as much as sun
or wind or injurious beast. By these some action might be hindered, but
they are not hindrances to my impulse and disposition, because of my
power of reservation and adaptation; for the understanding adapts and alters
every obstacle to action to suit its object, and a hindrance to a given duty
becomes a help, an obstacle in a given path a furtherance.
21. Reverence the sovereign power over things in the Universe; this is what
uses all and marshals all. In like manner, too, reverence the sovereign power
in yourself; and this is of one kind with that. For in you also this is what
uses the rest, and your manner of living is governed by this.
22. What is not injurious to the city does not injure the citizens either. On
the occasion of every imagination that you have been injured apply this
canon: ‘If the city is not injured by this neither am I injured.’ But if the city
is injured you must not be angry, only point out to him who injured the city
what he has failed to see.
23. Repeatedly dwell on the swiftness of the passage and departure of
things that are and of things that come to be. For substance is like a river in
perpetual flux, its activities are in continuous changes, and its causes in
myriad varieties, and there is scarce anything which stands still, even what
is near at hand; dwell, too, on the infinite gulf of the past and the future, in
which all things vanish away. Then how is he not a fool who in all this is
puffed up or distracted or takes it hardly, as if he were in some lasting
scene, which has troubled him for long?
24. Call to mind the whole of Substance of which you have a very small
portion, and the whole of time whereof a small hair’s breadth has been
determined for you, and of the chain of causation whereof you are how
small a link.
25. Another does wrong. What is that to me? Let him look to it; he has his
own disposition, his own activity. I have now what Universal Nature wills
me to have, and I do what my own nature wills me to do.
26. See that the governing and sovereign part of your soul is undiverted by
the smooth or broken movement in the flesh, and let it not blend therewith,
but circumscribe itself, and limit those affections within the (bodily) parts.
But when they are diffused into the understanding by dint of that other
sympathy,
 as needs must be in a united system, then you must not try to
resist the sensation, which is natural, yet the governing part must not of
itself add to the affection the judgement that it is either good or bad.
27. ‘Live with the gods.’ But he is living with the gods who continuously
exhibits his soul to them, as satisfied with its dispensation and doing what
the deity, the portion of himself
 which Zeus has given to each man to
guard and guide him, wills. And this deity is each man’s mind and reason.
28. Are you angry with the man whose person or whose breath is rank?
What will anger profit you? He has a foul mouth, he has foul armpits; there
is a necessary connexion between the effluvia and its causes. ‘Well, but the
creature has reason, and can, if he stops to think, understand why he is
offensive.’ Bless you! and so too have you reason; let reasonable
disposition move reasonable disposition; point it out, remind him; for if
he hearkens, you will cure him and anger will be superfluous. You are
neither play-actor nor harlot.
29. As you intend to live when you depart, so you are able to live in this
world; but if they do not allow you to do so, then depart this life, yet so as if
you suffered no evil fate. The chimney smokes and I leave the room. Why
do you think it a great matter? But while no such reason drives me out, I
remain a free tenant and none shall prevent me acting as I will, and I will
what agrees with the nature of a reasonable and social creature.
30. The mind of the Whole is social. Certainly it has made the inferior in
the interests of the superior and has connected the superior one with
another. You see how it has subordinated, coordinated, and allotted to each
its due and brought the ruling creatures into agreement one with another.
31. How have you hitherto borne yourself to gods, parents, brother, wife,
children, masters, tutors, friends, connexions, servants? Has your relation to
all men hitherto been: ‘not to have wrought nor to have said a lawless thing
to any’? <Homer> Remind yourself of the kinds of things you have passed through
and the kinds you have had strength to endure; that the story of your life is
written and your service accomplished. How many beautiful things have
been revealed, how many pleasures and pains you have looked down upon,
how many ambitions ignored, to how many unkind persons you have been
kind!
32. Why do the ignorant and unlearned confound men of knowledge and
learning? What soul has knowledge and learning? That which knows the
beginning and end and the reason which informs the whole substance and
through all eternity governs the Whole according to appointed cycles.
33. In how short a time, ashes or a bare anatomy, and either a name or not
even a name; and if a name, then a sound and an echo. And all that is
prized in life empty, rotten, and petty; puppies biting one another, little
children quarrelling, laughing, and then soon crying. And Faith, Selfrespect, Right, and Truth ‘fled to Olympus from the spacious earth’.
What, then, still keeps one here, if the sensible is ever-changing, never in
one stay, the senses blurred and subject to false impressions; the soul itself
an exhalation from blood, and a good reputation in such conditions vanity?
What shall we say? Wait in peace, whether for extinction or a change of
state; and until its due time arrives, what is sufficient? What else than to
worship and bless the gods, to do good to men, to bear them and to
forbear;<Epictetus> and, for all that lies within the limits of mere flesh and spirit, to
remember that this is neither yours nor in your power?
34. You are able always to have a favourable tide, if you are able to take a
right path, if, that is, you are able both to conceive and to act with rectitude.
These two things are common to God’s soul and to man’s, that is, to the
soul of every reasonable creature: not to be subject to another’s hindrance,
to find his good in righteous act and disposition, and to terminate his desire
in what is right.
35. If this is neither evil of mine nor action which results from evil of mine,
and if the Universe is not injured, why am I troubled because of it? And
what injury is there to the Universe?
36. Don’t be carried away by imagination which sees only the surface, but
help men as best you may and as they deserve, even though their loss be of
something indifferent. Do not, however, imagine the loss to be an injury, for
that habit is bad. Like the old man who, when he went away, used to ask
for his foster-child’s top, but did not forget that it was a top; so you should
act also in this instance. And so you are lamenting in the pulpit! Have you
forgotten, my friend, what these things were worth? I know, but to the
sufferers they were of vast importance.’ Is that a reason why you should
make a fool of yourself too?
37. ‘There was a time when I was fortune’s favourite, wherever and
whenever she visited me.’ Yes, but to be fortune’s favourite meant assigning
good fortune to yourself; and good fortune means good dispositions of the
soul, good impulses, good actions.