1. Wilt thou one day, my soul, be good, simple, single, naked, plainer to see
than the body surrounding thee? Wilt thou one day taste a loving and
devoted disposition? Wilt thou one day be filled and without want, craving
nothing and desiring nothing, animate or inanimate, for indulgence in
pleasures; not time wherein longer to indulge thyself, nor happy situation of
place or room or breezes nor harmony of men? Wilt thou rather be satisfied
with present circumstance and pleased with all the present, and convince
thyself that all is present for thee from the gods and all is well for thee and
will be well whatsoever is dear to them to give and whatsoever they
purpose to bestow for the sustenance of the perfect living creature, the good
and just and beautiful, which begets, sustains, includes, and embraces all
things that are being resolved into the generation of others like themselves?
Wilt thou one day be such as to dwell in the society of gods and men so as
neither to find fault at all with them nor to be condemned by them?
2. Observe what your nature requires in so far as you are governed by mere
physical nature; then do that and accept that, if only your nature as part of
the animal world will not be rendered worse. Next you are to observe what
your nature as part of the animal world requires and to take it all, if only
your nature as a reasonable being will not be rendered worse. But what is
reasonable is consequently also social. Make use then of these rules and do
not be troubled about anything besides.
3. Every event happens in such a way that your nature can either support it
or cannot. If then it happens so that your nature can support it, do not
complain but support it as it is your nature to do; but if so that your nature
cannot support it, do not complain, for it will destroy you quickly.
Remember, however, that your nature can support everything which it is in
the power of your own judgement to make tolerable and endurable by
representing to yourself that to do this is to your advantage or is your duty.
4. If he goes wrong, instruct him kindly and point out what is being
overlooked; if you fail, blame yourself or, better, not even yourself.
5. Whatever befalls you was prepared for you beforehand from eternity and
the thread of causes was spinning from everlasting both your existence and
this which befalls you.
6. Whether there are Atoms or Nature, the first postulate must be: ‘I am
part of the Whole which is governed by Nature’; the second: ‘I am allied in
some way to the parts that are of the same kind with me.’ For if I remember
these postulates, I shall, in so far as I am a part, not be disaffected to
anything assigned by the Whole; for nothing which benefits the Whole is
injurious to the part, since the Whole contains nothing which does not
benefit itself, and while all natural existences have this common attribute,
the nature of the Universe has this further attribute that no external cause
can compel it to generate anything injurious to itself.
By remembering, therefore, that I am a part of a Whole so characterized, I
shall be well-affected to all that results from it, and inasmuch as I am allied
in some way to the parts of the same kind as myself, I will do no unsocial
act, rather I will study the good of my kind and direct every impulse to the
common benefit and divert it from what opposes that benefit. Now when
things are being accomplished in this way, life must needs flow smoothly,
just as you would see that a citizen’s life is smooth as he progresses by acts
which benefit his fellow citizens and welcomes whatever his city assigns.
7. The parts of the Whole, all which the Universe naturally includes, must
necessarily perish, a word which is to be interpreted to denote change. Now
if this were naturally evil as well as necessary for the parts, the Whole
would not continue to be in a right condition while its parts were tending to
change and had been put together specifically with a view to perishing. (For
whether did Nature herself undertake to injure the parts of herself and to
create them with a tendency to evil, and bound by necessity to fall into evil,
or did such things come to pass without her knowledge? Neither view is
credible.)
But now suppose one dispensed with Nature and expounded facts by way of
‘natural law’; how absurd it is in one breath to assert that the parts of the
Whole change by natural law, and in the same moment to be surprised or
indignant as though at an occurrence in violation of natural law, particularly
when the dissolution of each is taking place into the elements out of which
each is composed. For this dissolution is either a dissipation of the atoms
out of which they were compounded or else a turning of the solid into its
earthy and of the vital spirit into its airy part, so that these too are caught up
into the Reason of the Whole, whether the Whole returns periodically
to
fire or is renewed by eternal exchanges.
And do not imagine this solid body and this vital spirit to be that of its
original entry into existence, for all this it took in only yesterday or the day
before, an influx from foodstuffs and the atmosphere which is respired;
what is changing then is what it took in, not what its mother brought into
the world. And even suppose that what thus is changing binds you
intimately to the individual self, that is in fact nothing, I think, to affect my
present argument.
8. After giving yourself these titles: good, self-respecting, true, sane,
conforming, high-minded, take care not to get others in their place; and, if
you do lose these titles, be quick to return to them. Remember, further, that
‘sanity’ was intended to denote apprehensive attention to individual objects
and the reverse of negligence; ‘conformity’ glad acceptance of the
assignments of Universal Nature; and ‘high-mindedness’ elevation of the
thinking part above the smooth or interrupted movement of the flesh, above
petty reputation and death and all indifferent things.
Therefore, if you continue to preserve yourself in these titles, not aspiring to
be called them by others, you will be a changed man and will enter upon a
changed life. For still to be such as you have been up to the present, to be
torn and polluted in such a way of life, is to be utterly brutalized, to cling to
mere life like half-devoured combatants in the arena, a mass of wounds
and dusty blood, yet imploring to be kept alive until the morrow, only to be
exposed in that state to the same teeth and claws.
Adventure yourself then upon these few titles, and if you are able to abide
in them, abide like a man translated to Islands of the Blest; but if you
perceive that you are falling away and losing control, go bravely away into
some corner, there to recover control, or even depart altogether from life,
not angrily, but simply and freely and with self-respect, having done at
least this one thing in life, to have made your exit thus.
To remember the titles, however, it will be a great help to you to remember
the gods, and that they at least do not wish to be the objects of servility, but
for all rational beings to be made into their likeness, and that the fig-tree
should be what does the work of a fig-tree, the dog of a dog, the bee of a
bee, and man the work of a man.
9. Play-acting, warfare, excitement, lethargy—in fact slavery! Every day
those sacred doctrines of yours, whichever of them you imagine and admit
without scientific investigation, will be obliterated, whereas you should
look at every object and do every act so that, at one and the same time,
circumstance is accomplished and theory exercised, and the confidence
which comes from a scientific knowledge of each experience is preserved,
unnoticed, not concealed. For when will you take your indulgence in
simplicity, when in dignity, when in the knowledge of what each object is in
essence, what station it holds in the world, how long it naturally persists, of
what it is compounded, to whom it can belong, who can give it and who
take it away?
10. A spider is proud when he traps a fly, a man when he snares a leveret,
another when he nets a sprat, another boars, another bears, another
Sarmatian prisoners. If you test their sentiments, are they not bandits?
11. Acquire a methodical insight into the way all things change, one into
another; attend continually to this part of Nature and exercise yourself in it,
for nothing is so likely to promote an elevation of mind. He has put off the
body and, reflecting that he will be bound almost at once to leave all these
things behind and to depart from men, he has devoted his whole self to
justice in what is being accomplished by himself, and to Universal Nature
in what comes to pass otherwise. And he spends no thought about what
someone may say or think about him or do against him, but is contented
with these two things, if he is himself acting justly in what is done in the
present, and if he embraces what is assigned to him in the present; and he
has put away every preoccupation and enthusiasm, and has no other will
than to pursue a straight path according to the law and, pursuing it, to
follow in God’s train.
12. What need have you of a hint or suggestion, when it is possible to see
what ought to be done and, if you are conscious of that, kindly to proceed
on this path without turning back; but if you are not conscious of it, to
suspend judgement and use the best men to advise you; or if some farther
points bar this advice, to go forward according to your present opportunities
cautiously, holding fast to what seems to be just? For it is best to achieve
justice, since, as you see, failure is to fail in this. The man who in
everything follows the rule of Reason is at once master of his time and
quick to act, at once cheerful in expression and composed.
13. Ask yourself directly you awake from sleep: will it be of any moment to
you, if just and right acts are blamed by another? No, it will not. Have you
forgotten what these who plume themselves upon praise or censure of
others are like at bed and board, the sort of things they do and avoid or
pursue, how they steal and plunder, not with hands and feet, but with the
most precious part of themselves, in which, whenever it determines, faith,
self-respect, truth, law, a good divinity come into being?
14. To Nature, who bestows all things and takes them away, the man who
has learnt his lesson and respects himself says: ‘Give what is thy good
pleasure, take back what is thy good pleasure’; and this he says not boasting
himself but only listening to her voice and being of one mind with her.
15. Small is this balance of life left to you. Live as on a height; for here or
there matters nothing, if everywhere one lives in the Universe, as in a city.

Let men see, let them study a true man, a man who lives in accord with
Nature. If they cannot bear him, let them kill him, for it were better so than
for him to live on those terms.
16. Don’t any more discuss at large what the good man is like, but be good.
17. Let your imagination dwell continually upon the whole of Time and the
whole of Substance, and realize that their several parts are, by comparison
with Substance, a fig-seed; by comparison with Time, the turn of a gimlet.
18. Dwell upon everything that exists and reflect that it is already in process
of dissolution and coming into being by change and a kind of decay or
dispersion, or in what way it is born to die, in a manner of speaking.
19. What creatures they are; they eat, sleep, copulate, relieve nature, and so
on; then what are they like as rulers, imperious or angry and fault-finding to
excess; yet but yesterday how many masters were they slaving for and to
what purpose, and tomorrow they will be in a like condition.
20. Each man’s benefit is what Universal Nature brings to each, and it is his
benefit precisely at the time she brings it.
21. ‘Earth loves the rain’<Euripides>: ‘the glorious ether loves to fall in rain’. The
Universe, too, loves to create what is to be. Therefore I say to the Universe:
‘Your love is mine.’ Is not that also the meaning of the phrase: ‘This loves
to happen’?
22. Either you go on living in the world and are familiar with it by now, or
you go out, and that by your own will, or else you die and your service is
accomplished. There is nothing beside these three: therefore be of good
courage.
23. Always realize vividly the saying that one place of retreat is like any
other, and how everything in the place you are in is the same as it would be
on the top of a hill or by the sea or wherever you choose. You will find
exactly what Plato says: ‘building round himself a fold on a hill and
milking his bleating flocks’.
24. What is my governing self to me, and what son of thing am I making it
now, and for what purpose am I employing it now? Is it void of reason? Is it
severed and torn asunder from society? Is it so melted into and blended with
the flesh that it conforms to its movements?
25. He who runs away from his master is a fugitive slave. But law is a
master and therefore the transgressor of law is a fugitive slave. In the same
way, also, he who gives way to sorrow or anger or fear, wishes that
something had not been or were not now, or should not be hereafter, of what
is appointed by that which ordains all things; and that is law, laying down
for every man what falls to his lot. He, therefore, who yields to fear or pain
or anger is a fugitive slave.
26. A man drops seed into a womb and goes his way and thereupon
another causal principle takes it, labours upon it and completes a new-born
babe. What a marvellous result of that small beginning. Next the babe
passes food through the gullet and thereupon another causal principle takes
it and creates sensation and impulse; in a word, life and strength and other
results, how many and how marvellous. Contemplate, therefore, in thought
what comes to pass in such a hidden way, and see the power, as we see the
force which makes things gravitate or tend upwards, not with the eyes, but
none the less clearly.
27. Reflect continually how all things came to pass in days gone by as they
do today, and reflect that so they will hereafter; and put before your eyes
whole dramas and scenes of the same kind, which you have known in
your own experience or from earlier history, the whole court of Hadrian, for
instance, or of Antoninus; of Philip, Alexander, and Croesus; for those
were all like these; the actors only were different.
28. Picture to yourself every man who gives way to pain or discontent at
any thing at all as like a pig being sacrificed, kicking and squealing. Such
also is the man who groans on his bed, alone and in silence. Think of the
chain we are bound by, and that to the rational creature only is it given to
obey circumstances of his own will, while mere obedience is necessary for
all.
29. At the time of each separate act, stop and ask yourself whether death is
to be feared because you are deprived of this.
30. When you run against someone’s wrong behaviour, go on at once to
reflect what similar wrong act of your own there is; for instance, to esteem
money or pleasure or glory as goods, and so on with each kind. For if you
attend to this, you will quickly forget your anger, when it occurs to you at
the same time that he is compelled, for what else can he do? Alternatively,
if you can, remove what in him is subject to compulsion.
31. When you see Satyrion, Eutyches, or Hymen, picture a follower of
Socrates; or an Euphrates, when you see Eutychion or Silvanus; an
Alciphron, when you see Tropaeophorus; and a Crito or Xenophon, when
you see Severus.So when you look at yourself, picture one of the
Caesars, and in every case picture a parallel. Then let the thought strike you
in the same moment: ‘Where are they all? Nowhere, or we know not
where.’ For in this way you will continually see that man’s life is smoke
and nothingness, especially if you remind yourself that what has once
changed will be no more in infinite Time. Why then are you bothered? Why
not satisfied to pass through this brief moment ordering your ways? What
kind of material condition and station are you running away from? What is
it all except a school of exercise for a reason which has exactly and
scientifically looked into what life contains? Wait, therefore, until you
assimilate even these things to yourself, as a strong stomach assimilates any
food and a bright fire turns whatever you throw into it to flame and light.
32. Don’t let it be possible for anyone to say of you truthfully that you are
not simple and good, but let him be a liar who thinks any of these things
about you. And this entirely rests with you; for who prevents your being
good and simple? Only make up your mind not to go on living, if you are
not like that, for Reason, too, disowns one who is not like that.
33. What is the soundest thing that can be done or said in a given material
condition? For whatever this may be, you are able to do or say it, and you
are not to make the excuse that you are prevented. You will never cease
groaning until you feel that to act appropriately to man’s constitution in any
material condition which occurs to you or befalls you is for you what luxury
is to the sensualist. For you should regard as an indulgence whatever you
can achieve in accord with your own nature, and this you can achieve
everywhere. Now the roller is not allowed everywhere to be moved
according to its own natural movement, nor are water, fire, and the rest,
which are governed by natural law or life without reason—for there are
many things which separate them and resist them. Mind and reason are able
to move through any thing that opposes, as their nature and their will
prescribe. Put before your eyes this ease with which reason will prove to be
carried through all things (as fire moves upwards, a stone down, a roller on
a slope) and ask for nothing more, for the remaining obstacles are either
of the lifeless body or else do not overwhelm it or do any harm at all
without the judgement and the consent of reason itself.
For mark you, were it not so, the man affected would have become evil at
once; at all events in all other constituted things whatever is affected itself
becomes worse because of any evil which happens to it, whereas in this
case, if one may so put it, a man becomes better and more laudable by right
use of circumstances. And generally, remember that nothing harms the
natural citizen which does not harm the city and nothing harms the city
which does not harm the law. Now none of what are called strokes of bad
luck harms the law: wherefore, not harming the law, it harms neither city
nor citizen.
34. For one bitten by true doctrines even the briefest and most familiar
saying is reminder enough to dispel sorrow and fear, for instance:
‘leaves,
the wind scatters some on the face of the ground;
like unto them are the children of men.’ <Homer>
Yes, ‘leaves’ too are your children, and ‘leaves’ those whose voices shout
and applaud convincingly or on the contrary curse you or blame and rail
beneath their breath; ‘leaves’ too even those who will receive and hand on
your fame hereafter. For they all ‘shoot in the season of spring’; then the
wind has thrown them down and the woodland ‘bears others’ in their stead.
Brief life is the common portion of all, yet you avoid and pursue each thing
as though it will be for everlasting. A little while and you will close your
eyes, and now another will be lamenting him who carried you out.
35. The healthy eye should be able to look at every object of sight, and not
to say: ‘I wish it were green’, for this is what a man does who has
ophthalmia. The healthy ear and nose must be ready for every object of
hearing or smell, and the healthy stomach must be disposed to every kind of
nourishment as the mill is ready for everything which it is made to grind.
Accordingly the healthy understanding too must be ready for all
circumstances; but that which says: ‘may my children be kept safe’ or ‘may
all men praise whatever I do’, is the eye looking for green or the teeth for
what is tender.
36. No one is so fortunate but that when he is dying some will be at his
bedside welcoming the evil that is coming to him. Was he earnest and wise;
perhaps there will be someone at the end to say of him: ‘we shall breathe
more freely now this schoolmaster has gone; he was not hard on any of us,
but I could feel he was tacitly condemning us.’ So much for the earnest
man; but in our own case what a number of other things there are for
which many want to be rid of us. You will think then of this as you die and
will depart more easily, thinking to yourself: ‘I am going away from the
kind of life in which even my fellow men, for whom I laboured, prayed, and
thought so much, even they wish me to go away, hoping perhaps for some
relief by my death.’ Why then should one hold on to a longer stay in this
world? Do not, however, on this account leave them with less kindness, but
preserve your own character, friendly and well disposed and propitious; and
again do not go as if you were being torn away, but as for a man who has a
quiet end the soul slips easily from its casing, so should your departure be
from them. For it was Nature who bound you and united you to them, and
now she sets you free. I am set free from men who are certainly my
kinsfolk, yet I do not resist and I go under no compulsion. For this, too, is
one of the things which are according to Nature.
37. Accustom yourself in the case of whatever is done by anyone, so far as
possible to inquire within yourself: ‘to what end does this man do this?’
And begin with yourself and first examine yourself
38. Remember that what is hidden within you controls the strings; that is
activity, that is life, that, if one may say so, is the man. Never occupy your
imagination besides with the body which encloses you like a vessel and
these organs which are moulded round you. They are like an axe, only
differing as being attached to the body. For, indeed, these parts are of no
more use without the cause which moves or checks them than the shuttle to
the weaver, the pen to the writer or the whip to the man who holds the reins.