1. This also conduces to contempt of vainglory, that it is no longer in your
power to have lived your whole life, or at any rate your life from manhood,
in the pursuit of philosophy. To yourself as well as to many others it is plain
that you fall far short of philosophy. And so you are tainted, and it is no
longer easy for you to acquire the reputation of a philosopher. Your calling,
too,
in life has a rival claim. Therefore, if you have truly seen where the
matter at issue lies, put away the question of what men will think of you
and be satisfied if you live the rest of your life, be it more or less, as your
nature wills. Consider accordingly what it does will, and let nothing besides
distract you; for experience has taught you in how many paths you have
strayed and nowhere found the good life: not in logical arguments, not in
riches, not in glory, not in self-indulgence, nowhere. Where then is it to be
found?
In doing what man’s nature requires. How then will he do this? If
he hold fast doctrines upon which impulses and actions depend. What
doctrines are these? They concern good and evil, how nothing is good for
man which does not make him just, sober, brave, and free; nothing evil
which does not produce effects the opposite of these.
2. On the occasion of each act, ask yourself: ‘How is this related to me?
Shall I repent of it? But a little while and I am dead and all things are taken
away. What more do I require, if my present work is the work of an
intelligent and social creature, subject to the same law as God?’
3. Alexander, Julius Caesar, and Pompeius, what are they by comparison
with Diogenes, Heraclitus, and Socrates? For these men saw reality and its
causal and material aspects, and their ruling selves were self-determined;
but as for the former, how much there was to provide for, and of how many
things they were the servants.
4. Even if you break your heart, none the less they
 will do just the same.
5. In the first place, be not troubled; for all things are according to
Universal Nature, and in a little while you will be no one and nowhere,
even as Hadrian and Augustus are no more. Next, looking earnestly at the
question, perceive its essence, and reminding yourself that your duty is to
be a good man, and what it is that man’s nature demands, do that without
swerving, and speak the thing that appears to you to be most just, provided
only that it is with kindness and modesty, and without hypocrisy.
6. The work of Universal Nature is this: to transfer what is here to there, to
make changes, to take up from here and to carry there. All things are
alterations, but the assignments, too, are impartial: all things are familiar,
but not so that we need dread some new experience.
7. Every natural thing is satisfied when it fares well, and a reasonable nature
fares well when it gives its assent to nothing false or obscure in its
imaginations, directs its impulses only to social ends, desires and avoids
only what is in our power, and welcomes all that is assigned by Universal
Nature. For it is a part of Universal Nature, just as the leaf’s nature is part
of the plant’s, only in that case the leaf’s nature is part of a Nature naturally
without sense or reason and able to be hindered, whereas man’s nature is
part of a Nature which is unhindered and reasonable and just, inasmuch as it
assigns to each, impartially and according to its worth, its share of times,
substance, cause, activity, experience. Consider, however, not whether you
will find one thing equal to another in everything, but whether the whole of
this taken together is not equal to the whole of that other.
8. You are not able to read; but you are able to restrain your arrogance, you
are able to rise above pleasures and pains, you are able to be superior to
fame, you are able not only not to be angry with the unfeeling and
graceless, but to care for them besides.
9. Let no one any longer hear you finding fault with your life in a palace;
nay, do not even hear yourself.
10. Regret is blame of oneself for having let something useful go by; but the
good must be something useful and worth the attention of a really good
man. Now no really good man would regret having let a pleasure go by: no
pleasure, therefore, is either useful or good.
11. What is this by itself in its own constitution, what is its substance or
substrate, what its causal element, what its function in the world and how
long a time does it persist?
12. When you are called from sleep with difficulty,

revive the thought that
to render social acts is according to your constitution and to human nature,
but to sleep is what you share also with dumb animals. Now what to every
creature is according to Nature is also more closely related to it, more part
of its flesh and bone, yes, and also more agreeable.
13. Continually and, if possible, on the occasion of every imagination, test
it by natural science, by psychology, by logic.
14. Whatever man you meet, say to yourself at once: ‘what are the
principles this man entertains about human goods and ills?’ For if he has
certain principles about pleasure and pain and the sources of these, about
honour and dishonour, about death and life, it will not seem surprising or
strange to me if he acts in certain ways, and I shall remember that he is
obliged to act like this.
15. Remember that it is as absurd to be surprised that the world brings forth
the fruits with which it teems as that the fig-tree should bear figs.9 And it is
absurd for the physician or the master of a ship to be surprised, if a patient
is feverish or if a head wind gets up.
16. Remember that to change your course and to follow someone who
puts you right is not to be less free. For the change is your own action,
proceeding according to your own impulse and decision, and indeed
according to your mind.
17. If it is in your power to decide, why do you do it? But if in another’s,
whom do you find fault with? The atoms or the gods? Either is madness.
You must find fault with no one. If you are able, put him right; if you can’t
do this, at least put the thing itself right; but if you can’t even do this, to
what purpose still does fault-finding tend? For nothing should be done
without a purpose.
18. What dies does not fall outside the Universe. If it remains here and
changes here, it is also resolved here into the eternal constituents, which are
elements of the Universe and of yourself. And the elements themselves
change and make no grievance of it.
19. Each has come into being for a purpose—a horse, say, or a vine. Why
are you surprised? So the Sun God will say: ‘I came into being for a
purpose’, and the rest of the gods too. What then is the purpose of your
coming to be? ‘To please yourself?’ See whether the idea allows itself to
be framed.
20. Nature has designed the ending of each thing, no less than its beginning
and its continuance, like one who throws a ball up. What good is it to the
ball to go up or harm to come down and even fall to the ground? What good
to the bubble to be blown or harm to it to burst? The same is true of a
candle.
21. Turn it inside out and see the sort of thing it is, what it is like when it
grows old or falls sick or . . . [gap in text] Shortlived alike are praiser and
the praised, he who remembers and he who is remembered. Moreover, they
live in a mere corner of this region of the globe and even here all are not in
accord, nor is even a man in accord with himself. The whole earth, too, is a
mere point.
22. Attend to the subject, the activity, the doctrine, or the meaning. You
deserve to suffer this; so you would rather become good tomorrow than be
good today.
23. Am I doing something? I relate the act to beneficence to men. Does an
accident befall me? I accept it, relating it to the gods and to the source of all
things, from which all that comes to pass depends by a common thread.
24. As your bath appears to your senses—soap, sweat, dirt, greasy water,
all disgusting—so is every piece of life and every object.
25. Lucilla laid Verus in the grave, Lucilla followed; Secunda buried
Maximus, Secunda next; Epitynchanus buried Diotimus, Epitynchanus
next; Antoninus Faustina, Antoninus next. The same story over again. Celer
Hadrian, Celer came next. Where now are those acute minds, those who
unveiled the future, those who were swollen with pride? Acute minds like
Charax and Demetrius and Eudaemon and others of their kind. All creatures
of a day, dead long since; some remembered not even for a little while,
some turned to fable, and some even now fading out of fable. Keep these
facts in mind, that your own frame is bound either to be scattered into atoms
or your spirit to be extinguished or to change its place and be stationed
somewhere else.
26. A man’s joy is to do what is proper to man, and man’s proper work is
kindness to his fellow man, disdain of the movements of the senses, to
discern plausible imaginations, to meditate on Universal Nature and the
work of her hands.
27. There are three relations: one to your environment, one to the divine
cause from which all things come to pass for all, one to those who live at
the same time with you.
28. Pain is an evil, either to the body, in which case let the body say that it
is so, or to the soul. But it is in the soul’s power to preserve its own quiet
and calm, and not to judge pain to be an evil; for every judgement,
impulse, desire, or aversion is within, and nothing evil makes its way up to
this.
29. Wipe out impressions by continually saying to yourself: it is in my
power now not to allow any wickedness to be in this soul of mine, any
appetite or disturbance at all, but seeing what is the character of them all I
employ each according to its worth. Remember this power as Nature
requires.
30. Speak both in the senate and to every man of whatever rank with
propriety, without affectation. Use words that ring true.
31. The court of Augustus, his wife, daughter, grandsons, stepsons, sister,
Agrippa, his kinsmen, familiar friends, Areios, Maecenas, doctors,
sacrificial ministers—a whole court dead. Next pass on to other courts—
death not of a single individual, but of a family, like the children of
Pompeius. Then the familiar inscription upon tombs: THE LAST OF HIS
LINE. Calculate all the anxiety of those who preceded them in order to
leave behind an heir, and then it was ordained that one should be the last;
here again a whole family dead.
32. You must plan your life, one action at a time, and be content if each
acquires its own end as best it can; and that it should acquire its end, no one
at all can prevent you. ‘But some external obstacle will be in the way.’
None to prevent action with justice, temperance, and due reflection. ‘But
possibly some other activity will be hindered.’ Still, by meeting the actual
obstacle with resignation and good-temperedly altering your course to what
is granted you, a new action is at once substituted, which will fit into the
plan of which we are speaking.
33. Accept without pride, relinquish without a struggle.
34. If you have ever seen a dismembered hand or foot or a head cut off,
lying somewhere apart from the rest of the trunk, you have an image of
what a man makes of himself, so far as in him lies, when he refuses to
associate his will with what happens and cuts himself off or when he does
some unneighbourly act. You have somehow made yourself an outcast from
the unity which is according to Nature; for you came into the world as a
part and now you have cut yourself off. Yet here there is this admirable
provision that it is in your power to make yourself once more part of the
unity—God has permitted this to no other part, to come together again,
once it has been severed and cut off. But consider the kindness with which
he has honoured man. He has put it in his power, to begin with, not to be
broken off from the Whole, and then, if he has been broken off, to come
back again once more and to grow together and to recover his portion as a
part.
35. As each reasonable creature receives the rest of his abilities from the
Nature of the Whole, so have we received this ability, too, from her. Just as
she converts every obstacle and resistance, puts it into its place in the order
of necessity and makes it a part of herself, so, too, the reasonable creature
can make every obstacle material for himself and employ it for whatever
kind of purpose he has set out upon.
36. Do not allow the imagination of the whole of your life to confuse you,
do not dwell upon all the manifold troubles which have come to pass and
will come to pass, but ask yourself in regard to every present piece of work:
what is there here that can’t be borne and can’t be endured? You will be
ashamed to make the confession. Then remind yourself that it is not the
future or the past that weighs heavy upon you, but always the present, and
that this gradually grows less, if only you isolate it and reprove your
understanding, if that is not strong enough to hold out against it, thus taken
by itself.
37. Is Panthea or Pergamos still sitting by the funeral bier of Verus;
Chabrias or Diotimus by Hadrian’s bier? Absurd! And if they were still
sitting there, would the dead perceive it? And if they did perceive it, would
it give them pleasure? And, if it gave them pleasure, would the mourners
live for ever? Were not they too fated first to become old men and women,
and then to die? And when they were dead, what would those they mourned
do afterwards? This is all a smell of corruption and blood, and dust in a
winding sheet.
38. If you have a sharp sight; ‘see’, says he, ‘and judge, by the wisest
judgements you have.’
39. In the constitution of a reasonable creature I see no virtue able to oppose
justice: but I see one able to oppose pleasure, self-control.
40. If you cancel your judgement about what seems to pain you, you
yourself stand firm on surest ground. ‘What is self?’ ‘Reason.’ ‘But I am
not reason.’ ‘Granted; then do not let reason itself trouble itself, but if some
other part of you is harmed, let it form its own judgement about itself.’
41. An obstacle to sense perception is injurious to animal nature; an
obstacle to impulse is equally injurious to animal nature. (And something
else may similarly be an obstacle and injurious to the constitution of a
plant.) Thus then an obstacle to reason is injurious to a reasoning nature.
Transfer, therefore, all these considerations to yourself. Perhaps pain and
pleasure are affecting you. Sense affection must look to it. Did an obstacle
oppose your impulse? If you started out to satisfy it without mental
reservation, the obstacle is at once injurious to you as a reasonable being;
but if you experience the general lot, you are not yet hurt or hindered. The
properties of the mind, you know, no one else is wont to hinder, for neither
fire nor steel nor despot nor abuse affect it one whit, when it has become ‘a
sphere rounded and at rest’.
42. I do not deserve to give myself pain, for I never deliberately gave
another pain.
43. One thing gives joy to one man, another to another; it is my joy if I keep
my governing self intact, not turning my back on any human being nor on
anything that befalls men, but seeing everything with kind eyes, welcoming
and employing each occasion according to its merits.
44. See that you bestow this present time upon yourself. Those who rather
run after fame in the future leave out of account that men hereafter will be
just such others as these whom they find hard to bear, and those men, too,
will be liable to death. What, after all, is it to you if men hereafter resound
your name with such and such voices or have such and such a judgement
about you?
45. ‘Take me up and cast me where you please.’ For there I shall keep the
divinity within me propitious; satisfied, that is, if it should behave and act
consistently with its own constitution.
Is this a sufficient reason why my soul should be in evil case, should lower
itself, be humbled, craving, fettered, fluttering? What will you discover to
be a sufficient reason for that?
46. Nothing can happen to any human being which is not an incident
appropriate to man, nor to an ox which is not appropriate to oxen, nor to a
vine which is not appropriate to vines, nor to a stone which is not peculiar
to a stone. If then that happens to each which is both customary and natural,
why should you be discontented with your lot? For the Universal Nature did
not bring to you what you could not bear.
47. If you suffer pain because of some external cause, what troubles you is
not the thing but your decision about it, and this it is in your power to wipe
out at once. But if what pains you is something in your own disposition,
who prevents you from correcting your judgement? And similarly, if you
are pained because you fail in some particular action which you imagine to
be sound, why not continue to act rather than to feel pain? ‘But something
too strong for you opposes itself.’ Then do not be pained, for the reason
why the act is not done does not rest with you. ‘Well, but if this be left
undone, life is not worth living.’ Depart then from life in a spirit of good
will, even as he dies who achieves his end, contented, too, with what
opposes you.
48. Remember that the governing self becomes invincible when it
withdraws into itself and is satisfied with itself, doing nothing which it does
not will to do, even if its opposition is unreasonable. How much more then
when it decides both with reason and circumspection about a given case?
On this account the understanding free from passions is a citadel of
refuge; for man has nothing stronger into which to retreat and be
thereafter inexpugnable. He then who has not seen this is uninstructed; he
who has seen it and does not retreat is unfortunate.
49. Do not say more to yourself than the first impressions report. You have
been told that some one speaks evil of you. This is what you have been told;
you have not been told that you are injured. I see that the little child is ill;
this is what I see, but that he is in danger I do not see. In this way then abide
always by the first impressions and add nothing of your own from within,
and that’s an end of it; or rather one thought you may add, as one who is
acquainted with every change and chance of the world.
50. The cucumber is bitter? Put it down. There are brambles in the path?
Step to one side. That is enough, without also asking: ‘Why did these things
come into the world at all?’ Because the student of Nature will ridicule the
question, exactly as a carpenter or cobbler would laugh at you if you found
fault because you see shavings and clippings from their work in their
shops. Still, they do have a place to throw rubbish into, whereas Universal
Nature has nothing outside himself, and yet the astonishing thing in her way
of working is that, having fixed her own limits, she is ever changing into
herself everything within those limits that looks as though it were going bad
and getting old and useless, and out of these very things creating again
others that are young, in order that she may need no substance from outside
nor require any place to throw away what begins to decay. Thus she is
satisfied with her own room, her own material and her own way of working.
51. Be not a sluggard in action nor confused in conversation nor wandering
in imagination. Briefly, neither contract into yourself nor boil over in spirit
nor in your mode of life leave no room for leisure.
‘They kill you, cut you in pieces, pursue you with curses.’ What has this
to do with your understanding abiding pure, sane, temperate, and just? As if
a man should stand by a sweet and crystal spring of water and curse it, but
it never ceases bubbling up in water fresh to drink, and if he throw in mud
or dung, it will quickly break it up and wash it away and will in no way be
discoloured. How then shall you possess an overflowing fountain, not a
mere cistern? If you guard yourself every hour unto freedom, contentedly,
too, simply and reverently.
52. He who does not know that the Universe exists, does not know where
he is. He who does not know the purpose of the Universe, does not know
who he is nor what the Universe is. He who fails in any one of these
respects could not even declare the purpose of his own birth. What then do
you imagine him to be, who shuns or pursues the praises of men who
applaud, and yet do not know either where they are or who they are?
53. Do you wish to be praised by a man who curses himself three times
every hour? Do you wish to please a man who doesn’t please himself? Does
a man please himself who repents of nearly everything that he does?
54. No longer merely breathe with the atmosphere that surrounds you, but
now think also with the mind that surrounds all things. For the power of
mind is as much poured out everywhere and distributed for him who is
willing to absorb it, as the power of atmosphere for him who is able to
respire it.
55. In general evil does no injury to the Universe, and particular evil does
no injury to a neighbour, but only injures him to whom it is permitted to be
delivered from it as soon as ever he himself determines.
56. To my will the will of a neighbour is as indifferent as his vital spirit and
his flesh. For even though we were brought into the world more than
anything else for the sake of one another, still each of our governing selves
has its own sovereign right; for otherwise the evil of my neighbour would
surely be evil of mine, and that was not God’s good pleasure, in order that
my unhappiness might not depend on someone other than myself
57. The sun appears to be poured down and indeed is poured in every
direction but not poured out. For this pouring is extension, and so its beams
are called rays from their being extended. Now you may see what kind of
thing a ray is by observing the sun’s light streaming through a chink into a
darkened room. For it is stretched in a straight line, and rests so to speak
upon any solid body that meets it and cuts off the flow of air beyond. It
rests there and does not glide off or fall. The pouring and diffusion of the
understanding then should be similar, in no way a pouring out, but an
extension, and it should not rest forcibly or violently on obstacles that meet
it nor yet fall down, but stand still and illuminate the object that receives it;
for that which does not reflect it will rob itself of the light.
58. He who fears death fears either total loss of consciousness or a change
of consciousness. Now if you should no longer possess consciousness, you
will no longer be aware of any evil; alternatively, if you possess an altered
consciousness, you will be an altered creature and will not cease from
living.
59. Men have come into the world for the sake of one another. Either
instruct them then or bear with them.
60. An arrow’s path and the mind’s path are different. Nevertheless, both
when it is on its guard and when it revolves round a subject of inquiry, the
path of mind is none the less direct and upon its object.
61. Enter into the governing self of every man and permit every other man
to enter into your own.