1. From my grandfather Verus:
the lessons of noble character and even
temper.
2. From my father’s reputation and my memory of him: modesty and
manliness.
3. From my mother: piety and bountifulness, to keep myself not only from
doing evil but even from dwelling on evil thoughts, simplicity too in diet
and to be far removed from the ways of the rich.
4. From my mother’s grandfather: not to have attended public schools but
enjoyed good teachers at home, and to have learned the lesson that on
things like these it is a duty to spend liberally.
5. From my tutor: not to become a partisan of the Green jacket or the Blue
in the races, nor of Thracian or Samnite gladiators;
to bear pain and be
content with little; to work with my own hands, to mind my own business,
and to be slow to listen to slander.
6. From Diognetus:
 to avoid idle enthusiasms; to disbelieve the professions
of sorcerers and impostors about incantations and exorcism of spirits and
the like; not to cock-fight or to be excited about such sports; to put up
with plain-speaking and to become familiar with philosophy; to hear the
lectures first of Baccheius
, then of Tandasis and Marcian, in boyhood to
write essays and to aspire to the camp-bed and skin coverlet and the other
things which are part of the Greek training.
7. From Rusticus: to get an impression of need for reform and treatment
of character; not to run off into zeal for rhetoric, writing on speculative
themes, discoursing on edifying texts, exhibiting in fanciful colours the
ascetic or the philanthropist. To avoid oratory, poetry, and preciosity; not to
parade at home in ceremonial costume or to do things of that kind; to write
letters in the simple style, like his own from Sinuessa to my mother. To be
easily recalled to myself and easily reconciled with those who provoke
and offend, as soon as they are willing to meet me. To read books
accurately and not be satisfied with superficial thinking about things or
agree hurriedly with those who talk round a subject. To have made the
acquaintance of the Discourses of Epictetus, of which he allowed me to
share a copy of his own.
8. From Apollonius: moral freedom, not to expose oneself to the
insecurity of fortune; to look to nothing else, even for a little while, except
to reason. To be always the same, in sharp attacks of pain, in the loss of a
child, in long illnesses. To see clearly in a living example that a man can be
at once very much in earnest and yet able to relax.
Not to be censorious in exposition; and to see a man who plainly considered
technical knowledge and ease in communicating general truths as the least
of his good gifts. The lesson how one ought to receive from friends what
are esteemed favours, neither lowering oneself on their account, nor
returning them tactlessly.
9. From Sextus: graciousness, and the pattern of a household governed by
its head, and the notion of life according to Nature. Dignity without
pretence, solicitous consideration for friends, tolerance of amateurs and of
those whose opinions have no ground in science.
A happy accommodation to every man, so that not only was his
conversation more agreeable than any flattery, but he excited the greatest
reverence at that very time in the very persons about him. Certainty of
grasp, and method in the discovery and arrangement of the principles
necessary to human life.
Never to give the impression of anger or of any other passion, but to be at
once entirely passionless and yet full of natural affection. To praise without
noise, to be widely learned without display.
10. From Alexander the grammarian: to avoid fault-finding and not to
censure in a carping spirit any who employ an exotic phrase, a solecism, or
harsh expression, but oneself to use, neatly and precisely, the correct phrase,
by way of answer or confirmation or handling of the actual question—the
thing, not its verbal expression—or by some other equally happy reminder.
11. From Fronto: to observe how vile a thing is the malice and caprice
and hypocrisy of absolutism; and generally speaking that those whom we
entitle ‘Patricians’ are somehow rather wanting in the natural affections.
12. From Alexander the Platonist: seldom and only when absolutely
necessary to say to anyone or write in a letter: ‘I am too busy’; nor by such
a turn of phrase to evade continually the duties incident to our relations to
those who live with us, on the plea of ‘present circumstances’.
13. From Catulus: not to neglect a friend’s remonstrance, even if he may
be unreasonable in his remonstrance, but to endeavour to restore him to his
usual temper. Hearty praise, too, of teachers, like what is recorded of
Athenodotus and Domitius, and genuine love towards children.
14. From Severus: love of family, love of truth, and love of justice. To
have got by his help to understand Thrasea, Helvidius, Cato, Dio, Brutus,
and to conceive the idea of a commonwealth based on equity and freedom
of speech, and of a monarchy cherishing above all the liberty of the
subject. From him, too, consistency and uniformity in regard for
philosophy; to do good, to communicate liberally, to be hopeful; to believe
in the affection of friends and to use no concealment towards those who
incurred his censure, and that his friends had no necessity to conjecture his
wishes or the reverse, but he was open with them.
15. From Maximus: mastery of self and vacillation in nothing;
cheerfulness in all circumstances and especially in illness. A happy blend of
character, mildness with dignity, readiness to do without complaining what
is given to be done. To see how in his case everyone believed ‘he really
thinks what he says, and what he does, he does without evil intent’; not to
be surprised or alarmed; nowhere to be in a hurry or to procrastinate, not to
lack resource or to be depressed or cringing or on the other hand angered or
suspicious. To be generous, forgiving, void of deceit. To give the
impression of inflexible rectitude rather than of one who is corrected. The
fact, too, that no one would ever have dreamt that he was looked down on
by him or would have endured to conceive himself to be his superior. To be
agreeable also (in social life).
16. From my father (by adoption): gentleness and unshaken resolution in
judgements taken after full examination; no vainglory about external
honours; love of work and perseverance; readiness to hear those who had
anything to contribute to the public advantage; the desire to award to every
man according to desert without partiality; the experience that knew where
to tighten the rein, where to relax. Prohibition of unnatural practices,
social tact and permission to his suite not invariably to be present at his
banquets nor to attend his progress from Rome, as a matter of obligation,
and always to be found the same by those who had failed to attend him
through engagements. Exact scrutiny in council and patience; not that he
was avoiding investigation, satisfied with first impressions. An inclination
to keep his friends, and nowhere fastidious or the victim of manias but his
own master in everything, and his outward mien cheerful. His long
foresight and ordering of the merest trifle without making scenes. The
check in his reign put upon organized applause and every form of lipservice; his unceasing watch over the needs of the empire and his
stewardship of its resources; his patience under criticism by individuals of
such conduct. No superstitious fear of divine powers or with man any
courting of the public or obsequiousness or cultivation of popular favour,
but temperance in all things and firmness; nowhere want of taste or search
for novelty.
In the things which contribute to life’s comfort, where Fortune was lavish to
him, use without display and at the same time without apology, so as to take
them when they were there quite simply and not to require them when they
were absent. The fact that no one would have said that he was a sophist, an
impostor, or a pedant, but a ripe man, an entire man, above flattery, able to
preside over his own and his subjects’ business.
Besides all this the inclination to respect genuine followers of philosophy,
but towards the other sort no tendency to reproach nor on the other hand to
be hoodwinked by them; affability, too, and humour, but not to excess. Care
of his health in moderation, not as one in love with living nor with an eye to
personal appearance nor on the other hand neglecting it, but so far as by
attention to self to need doctoring or medicine and external applications for
very few ailments.
A very strong point, to give way without jealousy to those who had some
particular gift like literary expression or knowledge of the Civil Law or
customs or other matters, even sharing their enthusiasm that each might get
the reputation due to his individual excellence. Acting always according to
the tradition of our forefathers, yet not endeavouring that this regard for
tradition should be noticed. No tendency, moreover, to chop and change, but
a settled course in the same places and the same practices. After acute
attacks of headache, fresh and vigorous at once for his accustomed duties;
and not to have many secrets, only very few and by way of exception, and
those solely because of matters of State. Discretion and moderation alike in
the provision of shows, in carrying out public works, in donations to the
populace, and so on; the behaviour in fact of one who has an eye precisely
to what it is his duty to do, not to the reputation which attends the doing.
He was not one who bathed at odd hours, not fond of building, no
connoisseur of the table, of the stuff and colour of his dress, of the beauty of
his slaves. His costume was brought to Rome from his country house at
Lorium; his manner of life at Lanuvium; the way he treated the taxcollector who apologized at Tusculum, and all his behaviour of that sort.
Nowhere harsh, merciless, or blustering, nor so that you might ever say ‘to
fever heat’, but everything nicely calculated and divided into its times, as
by a leisured man; no bustle, complete order, strength, consistency. What is
recorded of Socrates would exactly fit him: he could equally be abstinent
from or enjoy what many are too weak to abstain from and too selfindulgent in enjoying. To be strong, to endure, and in either case to be sober
belong to the man of perfect and invincible spirit, like the spirit of Maximus
in his illness.
17. From the gods: to have had good grandparents, good parents, a good
sister, good masters, good intimates, kinsfolk, friends, almost everything;
and that in regard to not one of them did I stumble into offence, although I
had the kind of disposition which might in some circumstances have led me
to behave thus; but it was the goodness of the gods that no conjunction of
events came about which was likely to expose my weakness. That I was not
brought up longer than I was with my grandfather’s second wife, that I
preserved the flower of my youth and did not play the man before my time,
but even delayed a little longer. That my station in life was under a
governor and a father who was to strip off all my pride and to lead me to
see that it is possible to live in a palace and yet not to need a bodyguard or
embroidered uniforms or candelabra and statues bearing lamps and the like
accompaniments of pomp, but that one is able to contract very nearly to a
private station and not on that account to lose dignity or to be more remiss
in the duties that a prince must perform on behalf of the public. That I met
with so good a brother,
able by his character not only to rouse me to care
of myself but at the same time to hearten me by respect and natural
affection; that my children were not deficient in mind nor deformed in
body; that I made no further progress in eloquence and poetry and those
other pursuits wherein, had I seen myself progressing along an easy road, I
should perhaps have become absorbed. That I made haste to advance my
masters to the honours which they appeared to covet and did not put them
off with hopes that, as they were still young, I should do it later on. To have
got to know Apollonius, Rusticus, Maximus. To have pictured to myself
clearly and repeatedly what life in obedience to Nature really is, so that,
so far as concerns the gods and communications from the other world, and
aids and inspirations, nothing hinders my living at once in obedience to
Nature, though I still come somewhat short of this by my own fault and by
not observing the reminders and almost the instructions of the gods. That
my body has held out so well in a life like mine; that I did not touch
Benedicta or Theodotus,but that even in later years when I experienced
the passion of love I was cured; that though I was often angry with Rusticus
I never went to extremes for which I should have been sorry; that though
my mother was fated to die young, she still spent her last years with me.
That whenever I wanted to help anyone in poverty or some other necessity I
was never told that I could not afford it, and that I did not myself fall into
the same necessity so as to take help from another; that my wife is what
she is, so obedient, so affectionate, and so simple; that I was well provided
with suitable tutors for my children. That I was granted assistance in
dreams, especially how to avoid spitting blood and fits of giddiness, and
the answer of the oracle at Caieta: ‘Even as thou shalt employ thyself; and
that, although in love with philosophy, I did not meet with any sophist or
retire to disentangle literary works or syllogisms or busy myself with
problems ‘in the clouds’.For all these things require ‘the gods to help and
Fortune’s hand’.