1. Say to yourself in the early morning:
I shall meet today inquisitive,
ungrateful, violent, treacherous, envious, uncharitable men. All these things
have come upon them through ignorance of real good and ill. But I,
because I have seen that the nature of good is the right, and of ill the wrong,
and that the nature of the man himself who does wrong is akin to my own
(not of the same blood and seed, but partaking with me in mind, that is in a
portion of divinity),
I can neither be harmed by any of them, for no man
will involve me in wrong, nor can I be angry with my kinsman or hate him;
for we have come into the world to work together, like feet, like hands, like
eyelids, like the rows of upper and lower teeth. To work against one another
therefore is to oppose Nature, and to be vexed with another or to turn away
from him is to tend to antagonism.
2. This whatever it is that I am, is flesh and vital spirit and the governing
self. Disdain the flesh: blood and bones and network, a twisted skein of
nerves, veins, arteries. Consider also what the vital spirit is: a current of air,
not even continuously the same, but every hour being expelled and sucked
in again. There is then a third part, the governing self. Put away your books,
be distracted no longer, they are not your portion. Rather, as if on the point
of death, reflect like this: ‘you are an old man, suffer this governing part of
you no longer to be in bondage, no longer to be a puppet pulled by selfish
impulse, no longer to be indignant with what is allotted in the present or to
suspect what is allotted in the future.’
3. The work of the gods is full of Providence: the work of Fortune is not
divorced from Nature or the spinning and winding of the threads ordained
by Providence. All flows from that other world; and there is, besides,
necessity and the well-being of the whole universe, whereof you are a part.
Now to every part of Nature that is good which the nature of the Whole
brings, and which preserves that nature; and the whole world is preserved as
much by the changes of the compound bodies as by the changes of the
elements which compose those bodies. Let this be sufficient for you, these
be continually your doctrines. But put away your thirst for books,
that so
you may not die murmuring, but truly reconciled and grateful from your
heart to the gods.
4. Remember how long you have been putting off these things, and how
many times the gods have given you days of grace, and yet you do not use
them. Now is it high time to perceive the kind of Universe whereof you are
a part and the nature of the governor of the Universe from whom you
subsist as an effluence, and that the term of your time is circumscribed, and
that unless you use it to attain calm of mind, time will be gone and you will
be gone and the opportunity to use it will not be yours again.
5. Each hour be minded, valiantly as becomes a Roman and a man, to do
what is to your hand, with precise . . . and unaffected dignity, natural love,
freedom and justice; and to give yourself repose from every other
imagination. And so you will, if only you do each act as though it were your
last, freed from every random aim, from wilful turning away from the
directing Reason, from pretence, self-love and displeasure with what is
allotted to you. You see how few things a man need master in order to live a
smooth and god-fearing life; for the gods themselves will require nothing
more of him who keeps these precepts.
6. You are doing yourself violence, violence, my soul; and you will have
no second occasion to do yourself honour. Brief is the life of each of us, and
this of yours is nearly ended, and yet you do not reverence yourself, but
commit your well-being to the charge of other men’s souls.
7. Do things from outside break in to distract you? Give yourself a time of
quiet to learn some new good thing and cease to wander out of your course.
But, when you have done that, be on your guard against a second kind of
wandering. For those who are sick to death in life, with no mark on which
they direct every impulse or in general every imagination, are triflers, not in
words only but also in their deeds.
8. Men are not easily seen to be brought into evil case by failure to consider
what passes in another’s soul; but they who do not read aright the motions
of their own soul are bound to be in evil case.
9. Always remember the following: what the nature of the Whole is; what
my own nature; the relation of this nature to that; what kind of part it is of
what kind of Whole; and that no man can hinder your saying and doing at
all times what is in accordance with that Nature whereof you are a part.
10. Like a true philosopher Theophrastus says, when comparing, as men
commonly do compare, various faults, that errors of appetite are graver than
errors of temper. For clearly one who loses his temper is turning away from
Reason with a kind of pain and inward spasm; whereas he who offends
through appetite is the victim of pleasure and is clearly more vicious in a
way and more effeminate in his wrong-doing. Rightly then and in a truly
philosophic spirit Theophrastus said that an offence attended with pleasure
involves greater censure than one attended with pain. And, generally, the
latter resembles more a man who was originally wronged and so is forced
by pain to lose his temper; the other has begun it himself and has been
impelled to do wrong, carried away by appetite to do what he does.
11. In the conviction that it is possible you may depart from life at once, act
and speak and think in every case accordingly. But to leave the company of
men is nothing to fear, if gods exist;
for they would not involve you in ill.
If, however, they do not exist or if they take no care for man’s affairs, why
should I go on living in a world void of gods, or void of providence? But
they do exist, and they do care for men’s lives, and they have put it entirely
in a man’s power not to fall into real ills; for the rest, if anything were an ill,
they would have provided also for this, that it may be in every man’s power
not to fall into it; (and how could what does not make a man worse make
his life worse?) But the nature of the Whole would not have winked at these
things either out of ignorance or because (though it knew of them) it had
not the power to guard against them or to put them right; neither would it
have made so vast an error, from want of power or skill, as to permit good
and ill to befall indifferently, both good and bad men equally. Now death
and life, good report and evil report, pain and pleasure, wealth and poverty,
these all befall men, good and bad alike, equally, and are themselves neither
right nor wrong: they are therefore neither good nor ill.
12. How all things are vanishing swiftly, bodies themselves in the Universe
and the memorials of them in Time; what is the character of all things of
sense, and most of all those which attract by the bait of pleasure or terrify
by the threat of pain or are shouted abroad by vanity, how cheap,
comtemptible, soiled, corruptible, and mortal: these are for the faculty of
mind to consider. To consider too what kind of men those are whose
judgements and voices confer honour and dishonour; what it is to die, and
that if a man looks at it by itself and by the separating activity of thought
strips off all the images associated with death, he will come to judge it to be
nothing else but Nature’s handiwork. But if a man fears Nature’s handiwork
he is a mere child; and yet death is not merely Nature’s handiwork, but also
her well-being. To consider also how mortal man touches God and through
what organ of himself, and when that part of him is in what sort of
condition.
13. Nothing is more wretched than the man who goes round and round
everything, and, as Pindar says,
‘searches the bowels of the earth’, and
seeks by conjecture to sound the minds of his neighbours, but fails to
perceive that it is enough to abide with the Divinity that is within himself
and to do Him genuine service. Now that service is to keep Him unsullied
by passion, trifling, and discontent with what comes from God or men.
What comes from the Gods is to be revered because of excellence; what
comes from men is dear because they are of one kindred with himself;
pitiful too sometimes, humanly speaking, by reason of their ignorance of
good and ill. This disablement is more grievous than that which robs the
eyes of the power to distinguish light from darkness.
14. Even were you about to live three thousand years or thrice ten
thousand, nevertheless remember this, that no one loses any other life than
this which he is living, nor lives any other than this which he is losing. Thus
the longest and the shortest come to the same thing. For the present is equal
for all, and what is passing is therefore equal: thus what is being lost is
proved to be barely a moment. For a man could lose neither past nor future;
how can one rob him of what he has not got? Always remember, then, these
two things: one, that all things from everlasting are of the same kind, and
are in rotation; and it matters nothing whether it be for a hundred years or
for two hundred or for an infinite time that a man shall behold the same
spectacle; the other, that the longest-lived and the soonest to die have an
equal loss; for it is the present alone of which either will be deprived, since
(as we saw) this is all he has and a man does not lose what he has not got.
15. ‘Everything is what you judge it to be.’ While the retort made to the
Cynic philosopher Monimus is plain enough, plain too is the use of the
saying, if one only take the gist of it, so far as it is true.
16. The soul of a man does violence to itself, first and foremost when it
becomes so far as in it lies, a separate growth, a blain as it were upon the
Universe. For to turn against anything that comes to pass is a separation
from Nature, by which the natures of each of the rest are severally
comprehended. Secondly, when it turns away from any human being or is
swept counter to him, meaning to injure him, as is the case with the natures
of those who are enraged. It violates itself, thirdly, when it is the victim of
pleasure or pain; fourthly, when it acts a part, and says or does anything
both feignedly and falsely. Fifthly, when, failing to direct any act or impulse
of its own upon a mark, it behaves in any matter without a plan or
conscious purpose, whereas even the smallest act ought to have a reference
to the end. Now the end of reasonable creatures is this: to obey the rule and
ordinance of the most venerable of all cities and governments.
17. Of a man’s life, his time is a point, his existence a flux, his sensation
clouded, his body’s entire composition corruptible, his vital spirit an eddy
of breath, his fortune hard to predict, his fame uncertain. Briefly, all the
things of the body, a river; all the things of the spirit, dream and delirium;
his life a warfare and a sojourn in a strange land, his after-fame oblivion.
What then can be his escort through life? One thing and one thing only.
Philosophy. And this is to keep the spirit within him unwronged and
unscathed, master of pains and pleasures, doing nothing at random, nothing
falsely and with pretence; needing no other to do aught or to leave aught
undone; and moreover accepting what befalls it, that is, what is assigned to
it, as coming from the other world from which it came itself. And in all
things awaiting death, with a mind that is satisfied, counting it nothing else
than a release of the elements from which each living creature is composed.
Now if there is no hurt to the elements themselves in their ceaseless
changing each into other, why should a man apprehend anxiously the
change and dissolution of them all? For this is according to Nature; and no
evil is according to Nature.