1. The sovereign power within, in its natural state, so confronts what
comes to pass as always to adapt itself readily to what is feasible and is
presented to it. This is because it puts its affection upon no material of its
own choice; rather it sets itself upon its objects with a reservation, and then
makes the opposition which encounters it into material for itself It is like a
fire, when it masters what falls into it, whereby a little taper would have
been put out, but a bright fire very quickly appropriates and devours what is
heaped upon it, and leaps up higher out of those very obstacles.
2. Nothing that is undertaken is to be undertaken without a purpose, nor
otherwise than according to a principle which makes the art of living
perfect.
3. Men look for retreats for themselves, the country, the seashore, the hills;
and you yourself, too, are peculiarly accustomed to feel the same want. Yet
all this is very unlike a philosopher, when you may at any hour you please
retreat into yourself. For nowhere does a man retreat into more quiet or
more privacy than into his own mind, especially one who has within such
things that he has only to look into, and become at once in perfect ease; and
by ease I mean nothing else but good behaviour. Continually, therefore,
grant yourself this retreat and repair yourself. But let them be brief and
fundamental truths, which will suffice at once by their presence to wash
away all sorrow, and to send you back without repugnance to the life to
which you return.
For what is it that shall move your repugnance? The wickedness of men?
Recall the judgement that reasonable creatures have come into the world for
the sake of one another; that patience is a part of justice; that men do wrong
involuntarily; and how many at last, after enmity, suspicion, hatred,
warfare, have been laid out on their death-beds and come to dust. This
should make you pause. But shall what is assigned from Universal Nature
be repugnant to you? Revive the alternative: ‘either Providence or blind
atoms’,
 and the many proofs that the Universe is a kind of Commonwealth.
Shall then the things of the flesh still have hold upon you? Reflect that the
understanding, when once it takes control of itself and recognizes its own
power, does not mingle with the vital spirit, be its current smooth or broken,
and finally reflect upon all that you have heard and consented to about pain
and pleasure.
Well, then, shall mere glory distract you? Look at the swiftness of the
oblivion of all men; the gulf of endless time, behind and before; the
hollowness of applause, the fickleness and folly of those who seem to speak
well of you, and the narrow room in which it is confined. This should make
you pause. For the entire earth is a point in space, and how small a corner
thereof is this your dwelling place, and how few and how paltry those who
will sing your praises here!
Finally, therefore, remember your retreat into this little domain which is
yourself, and above all be not disturbed nor on the rack, but be free and
look at things as a man, a human being, a citizen, a creature that must die.
And among what is most ready to hand into which you will look have these
two: the one, that things do not take hold upon the mind, but stand without
unmoved, and that disturbances come only from the judgement within; the
second, that all that your eyes behold will change in a moment and be no
more; and of how many things you have already witnessed the changes,
think continually of that.
The Universe is change, life is opinion.
4. If mind is common to us all, then also the reason, whereby we are
reasoning beings, is common. If this be so, then also the reason which
enjoins what is to be done or left undone is common. If this be so, law also
is common; if this be so, we are citizens; if this be so, we are partakers in
one constitution; if this be so, the Universe is a kind of Commonwealth. For
in what other common government can we say that the whole race of men
partakes? And thence, from this common City, is derived our mind itself,
our reason and our sense of law, or from what else? For as the earthy is in
me a portion from some earth, and the watery from a second element, and
the vital spirit from some source, and the hot and fiery from yet another
source of its own (for nothing comes from nothing, just as nothing returns
to nothing), so therefore the mind also has come from some source.
5. Death is like birth, a mystery of Nature; a coming together out of
identical elements and a dissolution into the same. Looked at generally this
is not a thing of which man should be ashamed, for it is contrary neither to
what is conformable to a reasonable creature nor to the principle of his
constitution.
6. These are natural and necessary results from creatures of this kind, and
one who wants this to be otherwise wants the fig tree not to yield its acrid
juice. And in general remember this, that within a very little while both he
and you will be dead, and a little after not even your name nor his will be
left.
7. Get rid of the judgement; you are rid of the ‘I am hurt’; get rid of the ‘I
am hurt’, you are rid of the hurt itself.
8. What does not make a man worse than he was, neither makes his life
worse than it was, nor hurts him without or within.
9. It was a law of necessity that what is naturally beneficial should bring
this about.
10. ‘All that comes to pass comes to pass with justice.’ You will find this to
be so if you watch carefully. I do not mean only in accordance with the
ordered series of events, but in accordance with justice and as it were by
someone who assigns what has respect to worth. Watch, therefore, as you
have begun and whatever you do, do it with this, with goodness in the
specific sense in which the notion of the good man is conceived. Preserve
this goodness in everything you do.
11. Don’t regard things in the light in which he who does the wrong judges
them, nor as he wishes you to judge them: but see them as in truth they are.
12. In these two ways you must always be prepared: the one, only to act as
the principle of the royal and law-giving art prescribes for the benefit of
mankind; the second, to change your purpose, if someone is there to correct
and to guide you away from some fancy of yours
. The guidance must,
however, always be from a conviction of justice or common benefit
ensuing, and what you prefer must be similar, not because it looked pleasant
or popular.
13. ‘You have reason?’ ‘Yes, I have?’ ‘Why not use it then? If this is doing
its part, what else do you want?’
14. You came into the world as a part. You will vanish in that which gave
you birth, or rather you will be taken up into its generative reason by the
process of change.
15. Many grains of incense upon the same altar; one falls first, another later,
but difference there is none.
16. Within ten days you will appear a god even to those11
to whom today
you seem a beast or a baboon, if you return to your principles and your
reverence of the Word.
17. Don’t live as though you were going to live a myriad years. Fate is
hanging over your head; while you have life, while you may, become good.
18. How great a rest from labour he gains who does not look to what his
neighbour says or does or thinks,
 but only to what he himself is doing, in
order that exactly this may be just and holy, or in accord with a good man’s
conduct. ‘Do not look round at a black character’, but run towards the
goal, balanced, not throwing your body about.
19. The man in a flutter for after-fame fails to picture to himself that each of
those who remember him will himself also very shortly die, then again the
man who succeeded him, until the whole remembrance is extinguished as it
runs along a line of men who are kindled and then put out. And put the case
that those who will remember never die, and the remembrance never dies,
what is that to you! And I do not say that it is nothing to the dead; what is
praise to the living, except perhaps for some practical purpose? For now
you are putting off unseasonably the gift of Nature, which does not depend
on the testimony of some one else . . .
20. Everything in any way lovely is of itself and terminates in itself, holding
praise to be no part of itself. At all events, in no case does what is praised
become better or worse. This I say also of what is commonly called lovely,
for instance materials and work of art; and indeed what is there lacking at
all to that which is really lovely? No more than to law, no more than to
truth, no more than to kindness or reverence of self. Which of these is
lovely because it is praised or corrupted because it is blamed? Does an
emerald become worse than it was, if it be not praised? And what of gold,
ivory, purple, a lute, a sword-blade, a flower-bud, and little plant?
21. You ask how, if souls continue to exist, the atmosphere has room for
them from time external. But how does the ground have room for the bodies
of those who for so long an age are buried in it? The answer is that, as on
earth change and dissolution after a continuance for so long make room for
other dead bodies, so in the atmosphere souls pass on and continue for so
long, and then change and are poured out and are kindled being assumed
into the generative principle of Universal Nature, and so provide room for
those which succeed to their place. This would be the answer presuming
that souls do continue. But we must consider not only the multitude of
bodies that are thus buried, but also the number of animals eaten every day
by ourselves and the rest of the animal creation. How large a number are
devoured and in a manner of speaking buried in the bodies of those who
feed upon them; and yet there is room to contain them because they are
turned into blood, because they are changed into forms of air and heat. How
shall we investigate the truth of this? By a distinction into the material and
the causal.
22. Do not wander without a purpose, but in all your impulses render what
is just, and in all your imaginations preserve what you apprehend.
23. Everything is fitting for me, my Universe, which fits thy purpose.
Nothing in thy good time is too early or too late for me; everything is fruit
for me which thy seasons. Nature, bear; from thee, in thee, to thee are all
things. The poet sings: ‘Dear city of Cecrops’, and will you not say: ‘Dear
city of God’?
24. Democritus has said: ‘Do few things, if you would enjoy tranquillity’.
May it not be better to do the necessary things and what the reason of a
creature intended by Nature to be social prescribes, and as that reason
prescribes? For this brings not only the tranquillity from doing right but
also from doing few things. For if one removes most of what we say and do
as unnecessary, he will have more leisure and less interruption. Wherefore
on each occasion he should remind himself: ‘Is this not one of the necessary
things?’ <Democritus> And he should remove not actions merely that are unnecessary, but
imaginations also, for in this way superfluous actions too will not follow in
their train.
25. Make trial for yourself how the life of the good man, too, fares well, of
the man pleased with what is assigned from Universal Nature and contented
by his own just action and kind disposition.
26. You have seen those things, look now at these: do not trouble yourself,
make yourself simple. Does a man do wrong? He does wrong to himself.
Has some chance befallen you? It is well; from Universal Nature, from the
beginning, all that befalls was determined for you and the thread was
spun. The sum of the matter is this: life is short; the present must be
turned to profit with reasonableness and right. Be sober without effort.
27. Either an ordered Universe or a medley heaped together mechanically
but still an order; or can order subsist in you and disorder in the Whole!
And that, too, when all things are so distinguished and yet intermingled and
sympathetic.
28. A black heart is an unmanly heart, a stubborn heart; resembling a
beast of prey, a mere brute, or a child; foolish, crafty, ribald, mercenary,
despotic.
29. If he is a foreigner in the Universe who does not recognize the essence
of the Universe, no less is he a foreigner, who does not recognize what
comes to pass in it. A fugitive is he who runs away from the reasonable law
of his City; a blind man, he who shuts the eye of the mind; a beggar, he who
has need of another and has not all that is necessary for life in himself; a
blain on the Universe, he who rebels and separates himself from the reason
of our common nature because he is displeased with what comes to pass
(for Nature who bore you, brings these things also into being); a fragment
cut off from the City, he who cuts off his own soul from the soul of
reasonable creatures, which is one.
30. Here is a philosopher without a tunic, another without a book, another
here half-naked. ‘I have no bread,’ he says, ‘still I stand firm by the Word.’
And I have nourishment from my lessons and yet do not stand firm.
31. Love the art which you were taught, set up your rest in this. Pass
through what is left of life as one who has committed all that is yours, with
your whole heart, to the gods, and of men making yourself neither despot
nor servant to any.
32. Call to mind by way of example the time of Vespasian: you will see
everything the same: men marrying, bringing up children, falling ill, dying,
fighting, feasting, trading, farming, flattering, asserting themselves,
suspecting, plotting, praying for another’s death, murmuring at the present,
lusting, heaping up riches, setting their heart on offices and thrones. And
now that life of theirs is no more and nowhere.
Again pass on to the time of Trajan; again everything the same. That life,
too, is dead. In like manner contemplate and behold the rest of the records
of times and whole nations; and see how many after their struggles fell in a
little while and were resolved into the elements. But most of all you must
run over in mind those whom you yourself have known to be distracted in
vain, neglecting to perform what was agreeable to their own constitution, to
hold fast to this and to be content with this. And here you are bound to
remember that the attention paid to each action has its own worth and
proportion; only so you will not be dejected if in smaller matters you are
occupied no farther than was appropriate.
33. Words familiar in olden times are now archaisms; so also the names of
those whose praises were hymned in bygone days are now in a sense
archaisms; Camillus, Caeso, Volesus, Dentatus; a little after, Scipio too
and Cato; then also Augustus, then also Hadrian and Antoninus. For all
things quickly fade and turn to fable, and quickly, too, utter oblivion covers
them like sand. And this I say of those who shone like stars to wonder at;
the rest, as soon as the breath was out of their bodies, were ‘unnoticed and
unwept’<Homer>. And what after all is everlasting remembrance? Utter vanity.
What then is that about which a man ought to spend his pains? This one
thing; right understanding, neighbourly behaviour, speech which would
never lie, and a disposition welcoming all which comes to pass, as
necessary, as familiar, as flowing from a source and fountain like itself.
34. With your whole will surrender yourself to Clotho to spin your fate into
whatever web of things she will.
35. All is ephemeral, both what remembers and what is remembered.
36. Contemplate continually all things coming to pass by change, and
accustom yourself to think that Universal Nature loves nothing so much as
to change what is and to create new things in their likeness. For everything
that is, is in a way the seed of what will come out of it, whereas you
imagine seeds to be only those which are cast into the earth or into the
womb. But that is very unscientific.
37. You will presently be dead and are not yet simple, untroubled, void of
suspicion that anything from outside can hurt you, not yet propitious to all
men, nor counting wisdom to consist only in just action.
38. Look into their governing principles, even the wise among them, what
petty things they avoid and what pursue!
39. Your evil does not consist in another’s governing principle, nor indeed
in any change and alteration of your environment. Where then? Where the
part of you which judges about evil is. Let it not frame the judgement, and
all is well. Even if what is nearest to it, your body, is cut, cauterized,
suppurates, mortifies, still let the part which judges about these things be at
rest; that is, let it decide that nothing is good or evil which can happen
indifferently to the evil man and the good. For what happens indifferently to
one whose life is contrary to Nature and to one whose life is according to
Nature, this is neither according to nor contrary to Nature.
40. Constantly think of the Universe as one living creature, embracing one
being and one soul; how all is absorbed into the one consciousness of this
living creature; how it compasses all things with a single purpose, and how
all things work together to cause all that comes to pass, and their wonderful
web and texture.
41. You are a spirit bearing the weight of a dead body, as Epictetus used to
say. <Epictetus>

42. For what comes to pass in the course of change nothing is evil, as
nothing is good for what exists in consequence of change.
43. There is a kind of river of things passing into being, and Time is a
violent torrent. For no sooner is each seen, then it has been carried away,
and another is being carried by, and that, too, will be carried away.
44. All that comes to pass is as familiar and well known as the rose in
spring and the grape in summer. Of like fashion are sickness, death,
calumny, intrigue, and all that gladdens or saddens the foolish.
45. What follows is always organically related to what went before; for it is
not like a simple enumeration of units separately determined by necessity,
but a rational combination; and as Being is arranged in a mutual coordination, so the phenomena of Becoming display no bare succession but a
wonderful organic interrelation.
46. Always remember what Heraclitus said: ‘the death of earth is the birth
of water, the death of water is the birth of atmosphere, the death of
atmosphere is fire, and conversely’<Heraclitus> Remember, too, his image of the man
who forgets the way he is going; and: ‘they are at variance with that with
which they most continuously have converse (Reason which governs the
Universe), and the things they meet with every day appear alien to them’;
and again: ‘we must not act and speak like men who sleep, for in sleep we
suppose that we act and speak’; and ‘we must not be like children with
parents’<Heraclitus>, that is, accept things simply as we have received them.
47. Just as, if one of the gods told you: ‘tomorrow you will be dead or in
any case the day after tomorrow’, you would no longer be making that day
after important any more than tomorrow, unless you are an arrant coward
(for the difference is a mere trifle), in the same way count it no great matter
to live to a year that is an infinite distance off rather than till tomorrow.
48. Think continually how many physicians have died, after often knitting
their foreheads over their patients; how many astrologers after prophesying
other men’s deaths, as though to die were a great matter; how many
philosophers after endless debate on death or survival after death; how
many paladins after slaying their thousands; how many tyrants after using
their power over men’s lives with monstrous arrogance, as if themselves
immortal; how many entire cities have, if I may use the term, died,
Helice, Pompeii, Herculaneum, and others innumerable. Run over, too, the
many also you know of, one after another. One followed this man’s funeral
and then was himself laid on the bier; another followed him, and all in a
little while. This is the whole matter: see always how ephemeral and cheap
are the things of man—yesterday, a spot of albumen, tomorrow, ashes or a
mummy. Therefore make your passage through this span of time in
obedience to Nature and gladly lay down your life, as an olive, when ripe,
might fall, blessing her who bare it and grateful to the tree which gave it
life.
49. Be like the headland on which the waves continually break, but it stands
firm and about it the boiling waters sink to sleep. ‘Unlucky am I, because
this has befallen me.’ Nay rather: ‘Lucky am I, because, though this befell
me, I continue free from sorrow, neither crushed by the present, nor fearing
what is to come.’ For such an event might have befallen any man, but not
every man would have continued in it free from sorrow. On what grounds
then is this ill fortune more than that good fortune? Do you, speaking
generally, call what is not a deviation from man’s nature a man’s ill fortune,
and do you suppose that what is not opposed to his natural will is a
deviation from his nature? Very well, you have been taught what that will
is. Can what has befallen you prevent your being just, high-minded,
temperate, prudent, free from rash judgements, trustful, self-reverent, free,
and whatever else by its presence with him enables a man’s nature to secure
what is really his? Finally, in every event which leads you to sorrow,
remember to use this principle: that this is not a misfortune, but that to bear
it like a brave man is good fortune.
50. An unscientific but none the less a helpful support to disdain of death is
to review those who have clung tenaciously to life. What more did they
gain than those who died prematurely? In every case they are laid in some
grave at last: Caedicianus, Fabius, Julianus, Lepidus, and any others like
them, who after carrying many to the grave were themselves carried out. To
speak generally the difference is a small one, and this difference longdrawn-out through what great toils and with what sorts of men and in how
weak a body. Do not count it then as a thing . . .; for see the gulf of time
behind and another infinite time in front: in this what difference is there
between a three-days-old infant and a Nestor of three generations?
51. Run always the short road, and Nature’s road is short. Therefore say and
do everything in the soundest way, because a purpose like this delivers a
man from troubles and warfare, from every care and superfluity.