1. Whosoever does injustice commits sin; for Universal Nature having
made reasonable creatures for the sake of one another, to benefit each other
according to desert but in no wise to do injury, manifestly he who
transgresses her will sins against the most venerable of the gods, because
Universal Nature is a nature of what is, and what is is related to all that
exists.
And further, he who lies sins in regard to the same divine being, and she is
named Truth and is the first cause of all truths. Now he who lies voluntarily
commits sin in so far as by deceit he does injustice, and he who lies
involuntarily sins, in so far as he is discordant with Universal Nature and
creates disorder by fighting against the natural order of the Universe; for he
who is carried of himself counter to truth does so fight, since he had before
received from Nature aptitudes by neglecting which he is now not able to
distinguish falsehood from truth.
Moreover, he who runs after pleasures as goods and away from pains as
evils commits sin; for being such a man he must necessarily often blame
Universal Nature for distributing to bad and good contrary to their desert,
because the bad are often employed in pleasures and acquire what may
produce these, while the good are involved in pain and in what may
produce this.
And further, he who fears pains will sometimes fear what is to come to pass
in the Universe, and this is at once sinful, while he who pursues pleasures
will not abstain from doing injustice, and this is plainly sinful. But those
who wish to follow Nature, being like-minded with her, must be indifferent
towards the things to which she is indifferent, for she would not create both
were she not indifferent towards both. Whosoever, therefore, is not himself
indifferent to pain and pleasure, death and life, honour and dishonour,
which Universal Nature employs indifferently, plainly commits sin.
And by ‘Universal Nature employing these indifferently’, I mean that in the
natural order they happen indifferently to what comes to pass and follows
upon an original impulse of Providence, whereby from an original cause it
had an impulse to this world order, having conceived certain principles of
what should come to be, and appointed powers generative of substances and
changes and successions of the like kind.
2. A wiser man’s part had been to go away from men without tasting
falsehood, hypocrisy, luxury, and pride; a second-best course is to breathe
your last filled at least with distaste for these things. Or is it your choice to
sit down with wickedness and does not your experience even yet persuade
you to flee from the plague? For corruption of understanding is much more
a plague than such a distemper and change of this environing atmosphere;
for this is a plague to animals, as animate beings, that is a plague to men,
as human beings.
3. Disdain not death, but be well satisfied with it, because this, too, is one of
the things which Nature wills. For as are adolescence and old age, growth
and maturity, development of teeth and beard and grey hair, begetting,
conception, and childbearing and the rest of the natural functions which
life’s seasons bring, such also is actual dissolution. This, therefore, is like a
man of trained reason, not to be rash or violent or disdainful in the face of
death, but to wait for it as one of the natural functions; and, as you now wait
for the unborn child to come forth from your wife’s womb, so expect the
hour in which your soul will drop from this shell.
And if you would have an everyday rule to touch your heart, it will make
you most contented with death to dwell upon the objects from which you
are about to be parted and the kind of characters with whom your soul will
be no longer contaminated. For you should in no wise be offended by them,
but rather both care for them and bear them gently, yet still remember that
your deliverance will not be from men like-minded with yourself. This
alone, if anything could, might draw you back and detain you in life, were it
granted you to live with those who had adopted the same doctrines; but, as
it is, you see how great is the burden in the discord of life lived with them,
so that you say: ‘Come swiftly, death, for fear I, too, forget myself.’
4. Whosoever does wrong, wrongs himself; whosoever does injustice, does
it to himself, making himself evil.
5. Often he who omits an act does injustice, not only he who commits an
act.
6. Sufficient are the present judgement that grasps its object, the present
social act, the present disposition well satisfied with all that comes to pass
from a cause outside the self.
7. Wipe out imagination: check impulse: quench desire: keep the governing
self in its own control.
8. One vital spirit is distributed in irrational creatures: one mind spirit is
divided in rational creatures; just as one element earth is in all earthy things
and we see by one light and breathe one atmosphere, all that have sight and
vital spirit.
9. All that partake in something common to them hasten towards what is of
the same kind. The earthy all tends to earth, the watery all flows together,
and the nature of air is similar so that they even need things to hold them
apart by compulsion. Fire rises because of the elemental fire, but is so ready
to combine in combustion with all fire here below that every material that is
a little too dry is easily ignited, because what hinders ignition is mixed in it
in too small proportions. Therefore also, all that partakes of a common
mind similarly, or even more swiftly, hastens to what is akin; for in
proportion as it is superior to the rest, so is it more ready to mix and be
blended with its own kind.
At any rate there were found from the first among irrational creatures,
hives, and flocks, care for nestlings, and what resembles love; for already
there were vital spirits there, and in the higher part the tendency to union
was found raised in degree, as it was not in plants or minerals or trees.
Among reasonable creatures, constitutions, friendships, households, and
gatherings were found, conventions too and armistices in war. Among the
yet higher, even among beings in a sense separated, there subsisted a unity
such as obtains among the stars. Thus progress towards the higher was able
to produce a sympathy even in what are separated.
Notice then what occurs now; only intelligent creatures have now forgotten
that zeal and inclination to each other, and here only you do not see
concurrence. Yet even so, they are overtaken in their flight, for nature is too
strong for them. Watch and you will observe what I mean; certainly one
would more quickly discover something earthy not attaching itself to the
earthy than man entirely cut off from man.
10. Man, God, and the Universe alike bear fruit, each in the appropriate
season, but if custom has come to apply the word strictly of the vine and
similar fruits, no matter. Reason, too, has its fruit, for the Whole and for
itself, and from reason other results similar to itself come to pass.
11. If you can, change him by teaching, but if you cannot, remember that
kindness was given you for this. The gods, too, are kind
to such men and
even co-operate with them to some objects, to health, to wealth, to
reputation, so good are they to men; and you may be so too; or say, who is
there to prevent you?
12. Labour, not like one who is unfortunate, nor wishing to be pitied or
admired: rather have only one wish: to bestir yourself or to keep quiet as the
reason of the City requires.
13. Today I escaped all circumstance, or rather I cast out all circumstance,
for it was not outside me, but within, in my judgements.
14. All things are the same: familiar in experience, transient in time, sordid
in their material; all now such as in the days of those whom we have buried.
15. Things stand outside our doors, themselves by themselves, neither
knowing nor reporting anything about themselves. What then does report
about them? The governing self.
16. Not in feeling but in action is the good and ill of the reasonable social
creature; even as his excellence and his failings are not in feeling but in
action.
17. To the stone that is thrown up it is no ill to be carried down nor good to
be carried upwards.
18. Penetrate within, into their governing selves, and you will see what
critics you fear, and what poor critics they are of themselves.
19. All things are in change, and you yourself in continuous alteration and
in a sense destruction. So, too, is the Universe as a whole.
20. Another’s wrong act you must leave where it is.
21. The ceasing of action, impulse, judgement is a pause and a kind of
death, not any evil. Now pass to the ages of your life, boyhood for instance,
youth, manhood, old age; for each change of these was a death; was it
anything to be afraid of? Pass now to your manner of life under your
grandfather, then under your mother, then under your (adoptive) father, and
when you discover many another destruction, change, and ending, ask
yourself: ‘Was it anything to be afraid of?’ So then even the ceasing, pause,
and change of your whole life is not.
22. Make haste to your own governing self, to that of the Whole, and that of
this man. To your own, to make it a righteous mind; to that of the whole, to
remind yourself what it is of which you are a part; to this man’s, that you
may observe whether it is ignorance or design, and may reflect at the
same time that his self is of one kind with your own.
23. As you are yourself a complement of a social system, so let every act of
yours be complementary of a social living principle. Every act of yours,
therefore, which is not referred directly or remotely to the social end
sunders your life, does not allow it to be a unity, and is a partisan act, like a
man in a republic who for his own pan sunders himself from the harmony
of his fellows.
24. Children’s fits of temper and dolls and ‘spirits carrying dead bodies’ <Epictetus>,
so that the story of the visit to the abode of Death strikes one more
vividly.
25. Penetrate to the individuality of the cause and separating it from the
matter, look into it; next isolate the time which at longest this individuality
can by its nature subsist.
26. You endure a myriad troubles because you are not content with your
governing self doing the kind of things it was formed to do. But enough.
27. When another blames or hates you or men express such sentiments, go
to their inward selves, pass in and see what kind of men they are. You will
see that you ought not to torment yourself in order that they may hold some
opinion about you. You must, however, be well disposed to them; for in the
natural order they are friends, and moreover the gods help them in a variety
of ways, by dreams, by prophecy; to get, however, the objects about
which they are concerned.
28. The rotations of the Universe are the same, up and down, from age to
age.
Now either the mind of the Whole has an impulse to each individual; and if
that is so, welcome what it initiates; or else it had an impulse once for all
and what follows is consequential upon that; and why are you anxious? And
whether the Whole be God, all is well—or whether it be Chance, somehow
molecules or atoms, be not yourself then ruled by Chance.
29. In a moment earth will cover us all, then earth, too, will change and
what ensues will change to eternity and that again to eternity. A man who
thinks of the continuous waves of change and alteration, and the swift
passage of all mortal things, will hold them in disdain.
29. The matter of the Whole is a torrent; it carries all in its stream. What
then, man, is your part? Act as Nature this moment requires; set about it, if
it is granted you, and don’t look round to see whether anyone will know.
Don’t hope for Plato’s Utopia, but be content to make a very small step
forward and reflect that the result even of this is no trifle. How cheap are
these mere men with their policies and their philosophic practice, as they
suppose; they are full of drivel. For who will change men’s convictions?
And without a change of conviction what else is there save a bondage of
men who groan and pretend to obey? Go to now and talk to me of
Alexander, Philip, and Demetrius of Phalerum. If they saw what
Universal Nature willed and went to school to her, I will follow: but if they
were actors on the world’s stage, no one has condemned me to imitate
them. The work of Philosophy is simplicity and self-respect; lead me not
away to vainglory.
30. ‘Look from above’ at the spectacle of myriad herds, myriad rites, and
manifold journeying in storm and calm; diversities of creatures who are
being born, coming together, passing away. Ponder, too, the life led by
others long ago, the life that will be led after you, the life being led in
uncivilized races; how many do not even know your name, how many will
very soon forget it and how many who praise you perhaps now will very
soon blame you; and that neither memorial nor fame nor anything else at all
is worth a thought.
31. Calm, in respect of what comes to pass from a cause outside you;
justice, in acts done in accord with a cause from yourself: that is to say,
impulse and act terminating simply in neighbourly conduct, because for you
this is according to Nature.
32. You have the power to strip off many superfluities which trouble you
and are wholly in your own judgement; and you will make a large room at
once for yourself by embracing in your thought the whole Universe,
grasping ever-continuing Time and pondering the rapid change in the parts
of each object, how brief the interval from birth to dissolution, and the time
before birth a yawning gulf even as the period after dissolution equally
boundless.
33. All that your eyes behold will very quickly pass away, and those who
saw it passing will themselves also pass away very quickly; and he who
dies in extreme age will be made equal in years with the infant who meets
an untimely end.
34. What governing selves are theirs, what mean ends have they pursued,
for what mean reasons do they give love and esteem! Accustom yourself to
look at their souls in nakedness. When they fancy that their blame hurts or
their praise profits, how great their vanity.
35. Loss is nothing else but change. In this Universal Nature rejoices and by
her all things come to pass well. From eternity they came to pass in like
fashion and will be to everlasting in other similar shapes. Why then do you
say ‘all things ever came to pass badly and that all will ever be bad’? So no
power it seems was ever found in so many gods to remedy this, but the
world is condemned to be straitened in uninterrupted evils?
36. The rottenness of the matter which underlies everything. Water, dust,
bones, stench. Again: marble, an incrustation of earth; gold and silver,
sediments; your dress, the hair of animals; the purple dye, blood, and so all
the rest. What is of the nature of breath too is similar and changing from
this to that.
37. Enough of this wretched way of life, of complaining and mimicry. Why
are you troubled, what novelty is there in this, what takes you out of
yourself? The formal side of things? Look it in the face. The material side
then? Face that. Besides these there is nothing, except even now at this late
hour to become simpler and better in your relation to the gods. To acquaint
yourself with these things for a hundred years or for three is the same.
38. If he did wrong, the harm is with him; but perhaps he did not.
39. Either all comes to pass from one fountain of mind, as in a single
organic body, and the part must not find fault with what is for the good of
the whole; or else there are atoms, nothing but a mechanical mixture and
dispersal. Why then be troubled? Say to your governing self: ‘are you dead,
gone to corruption, turned into a beast, are you acting a part, running with
the herd, feeding with it?’
40. The gods are either powerless or powerful. If then they are powerless,
why do you pray? But if they are powerful, why not rather pray them for
the gift to fear none of these things, to desire none of them, to sorrow for
none of them, rather than that any one of them should be present or absent?
For surely if they can co-operate with man, they can co-operate to these
ends. But perhaps you will say: ‘The gods put these things in my power.’
Were it not better then to use what is in your power with a free spirit rather
than to be concerned for what is not in your power with a servile and abject
spirit? Besides, who told you that the gods do not co-operate even in respect
to what is in our power? Begin at least to pray about these things and you
will see. That man prays: ‘How may I know that woman’; do you pray:
‘How may I not desire to know her.’ Another prays: ‘How may I get rid of
him’; do you pray: ‘How may I not want to be rid of him.’ Another: ‘How
may I not lose my little child’; do you pray: ‘How may I not be afraid to
lose him.’ Turn your prayers round in this way generally and see what is the
result.
41. Epicurus says: ‘In illness my conversation was not about the
sufferings of my body, nor used I’, he says, ‘to talk to my visitors about
such matters, but I continued to debate leading principles of science and to
keep only to this, how the understanding while conscious of such changes
in the mere flesh is yet undisturbed and preserves its own proper good. I did
not even’, he goes on, ‘permit the medical men to give themselves airs as
though they were doing some great thing, but my life passed on happily and
brightly.’ Do the same then as he did, in sickness if you are sick and in any
other circumstance, for it is common to every school not to desert
Philosophy in any at all of the accidents of life and not to gossip with the
ignorant and unlearned. Be intent only on what is now being done and on
the instrument you use to do it.
42. Whenever you are offended by a man’s shamelessness, ask yourself
immediately: ‘Is it possible then for the shameless not to be in the world?’
It is not; do not then ask for the impossible; for he, too, is one of the
shameless who must exist in the world. And have the same ready also for
the rogue, the traitor, and every kind of wrongdoer; for directly you remind
yourself that the class of such persons cannot but be, you will be gentler to
them as individuals. Another useful thing is to call to mind immediately
what virtue Nature gave man to meet this wrong, for she gave as an antidote
against the unfeeling, mildness, against another, some other faculty, and
generally speaking it is in your power to convert the man who has gone
astray, for every man who does wrong is going wrong from the goal set
before him and has gone astray. And what harm have you suffered? For you
will find that none of those with whom you are angry has done the kind of
thing by which your understanding was likely to become worse and it is
there that your ills and harms have their entire existence.
How is it an evil or strange event that the uninstructed does what
uninstructed men do? See whether you should not rather find fault with
yourself for not expecting that he would do this wrong; for you had
aptitudes from reason to enable you to argue that in all probability this man
will do this wrong, and yet you forgot and are surprised that he did wrong.
But, most important of all, turn inward to your own self, whenever you
blame the traitor or the ungrateful, for the fault is plainly yours, whether
you trusted a man with such a disposition to keep faith or whether, when
you bestowed a favour,
 you did not give it unreservedly or so that you
received the whole fruit from your act itself then and there. For when you
have done good, what more, oh man, do you wish? Is it not enough that
what you did was in agreement with your nature and do you seek a
recompense for this? As if the eye asked a return for seeing or the feet for
walking; for just as these were made for this which they effect according
to their proper constitution, and so get what is theirs, even thus man is made
by Nature to be benevolent, and whenever he contributes to the common
stock by benevolence or otherwise, he has done what he was constituted for,
and gets what is his own.